

===== PDF PAGE 0001 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS


===== PDF PAGE 0002 =====

BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
50 Old Bailey, LONDON
17 Stanhope Street, GLASGOW
BLACKIE & SON (INDIA) LIMITED
Warwick House, Fort Street, BOMBAY
BLACKIE & SON (CANADA) LIMITED
TORONTO


===== PDF PAGE 0003 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS
BY
MAX BORN
M.A. (Cantab.); Dr. phil.(Göttingen); (Hon.)Sc.D.(Bristol)
Stokes Lecturer in Mathematics, University of Cambridge
Authorized Translation from the German Edition by
JOHN DOUGALL, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.
SECOND EDITION
BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
LONDON AND GLASGOW
1937
TA Lib..


===== PDF PAGE 0004 =====

First published, I935.
Second edition, I937•
Printed in Great Britain by Blackie & Son, Ltd., Glasgow


===== PDF PAGE 0005 =====

LIBRARY,
Dedicated with gratitude
to my friend
ERICH ROSENBERG


===== PDF PAGE 0006 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0007 =====

PREFACE
-
The German edition of this book, which appeared in 1933 under
the title Moderne Physik, had its origin in a course of lectures which
I gave at the Technical College, Berlin-Charlottenburg, at the instance
of the Society of Electrical Engineers, and which were reported by
Dr. F. Sauter. The choice of material was not left entirely to myself,
the Society making certain suggestions which took into account the
previous knowledge and the professional predilections of its members.
A year or two later, the idea of an English edition was mooted.
But by this time the title of the book had become inappropriate, for
in the interval the growing point of physics had shifted, and interest
had become centred in the physics of the nucleus, of which only a
bare sketch had been given in the lectures. The change in the title,
however, has nothing to do with this, but is due to the fact that the
publishers already have a book entitled Modern Physics on their list
of publications.
I have taken considerable trouble to secure that the book should
be brought thoroughly up to date. A new chapter has been introduced,
containing an account of the great advances of the last few years-
the discovery of new particles, and the elucidation of the properties
of nuclei. The original chapters have also been extended by the addition
of new sections and paragraphs.
As a theoretical physicist, I have naturally placed the theoretical
interpretation of phenomena well in the foreground. The text itself,
however, contains only comparatively simple discussions of theory.
Proofs, short but complete, of the formula employed are collected
in a series of Appendices.
In the lectures two years ago, I emphasized with a certain pride
the successes of the theory-now I have rather to direct attention
to the immense progress which has been made on the experimental
side. But I have not been able to resist the temptation to mention
a few ideas of my own, which I hope may be of some assistance in
stirring the theory into renewed activity.
A new feature of the book is the introduction of dates.
Their
vii


===== PDF PAGE 0008 =====

viii
PREFACE
purpose is to serve as a historical guide, the years given not being
always the first date of publication of an idea or discovery, but that
of a specially important paper on the subject. I apologize for not having
been able to quote all important papers and authors.
I am much indebted to many helpers. Dr. Cockcroft (Cambridge)
and Dr. Nordheim (Haarlem) have read some chapters, which their
advice has enabled me to improve... Mr. Pryce, Mr. Weiss and Mr.
Goldhaber (Cambridge) have assisted me with the proof-reading. I
owe many thanks to Professor P. M. S. Blackett for permission to use
some of his beautiful photographs. I am particularly indebted to the
translator, Dr. John Dougall, for his painstaking work. He has not
only given an adequate rendering of the German, but has also kept a
careful look out for misprints or slips in the text and formula.
MAX BORN.
CambrIdGE, February, 1935.


===== PDF PAGE 0009 =====

CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
Page
1. Atomic Theory in Chemistry-
-
-
1
2. Fundamental Assumptions of the Kinetic Theory of Gases -
-
3
3. Calculation of the Pressure of a Gas
5
4. Temperature of a Gas
-
--
5. Specific Heat
-
6. Law of Distribution of Energy and Velocity
9
7. Free Path
17
8. Determination of Avogadro's Number
-
19
CHAPTER II
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
1. Conduction of Electricity in Rarefied Gases
-
-
24
2. Canal Rays and Anode Rays (Positive Rays)
28
3. X-rays
29
4. Radiations from Radioactive Substances
-
30
5. Prout's Hypothesis, Isotopy, the Proton
-
34
6. The Neutron -
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
7. Cosmic Rays. Positrons -
-
-
-
41
CHAPTER MI
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
1. Lorentz's Blectron Theory
-
-
-
44
2. The Theorem of the Inertia of Energy. Unitary Field Theory
46
3. Investigation of Atomic Structure by Scattering Experiments
51
4. Mass Defect and Nuclear Binding Energy
55
5. Heavy Hydrogen and Heavy Water
-
-
-
-
59
6. Artificial Disintegration of the Nuclous and Artificial Radioactivity
61


===== PDF PAGE 0010 =====

CONTENTS
CHAPTER IV
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
Page
1. Wave Theory of Light. Interference and Diffraction -
66
2. Light Quanta
-
-
69
3. Quantum Theory of the Atom
72
4. Compton Effect
-
75
5. Wave Nature of Matter. De Broglie's Theory
-
-
77
6. Experimental Demonstration of Matter Waves -
-
80
7. The Contradiction between the Wave Theory and the Corpuscular
Theory, and its Removal -
-
82
CHAPTER V
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES
1. The Bohr Atom; Stationary Orbits for Simply Periodic Motions -
-
91
2. Quantum Conditions for Simply and Multiply Periodic Motions
-
101
3. Matrix Mechanics -
-
-
115
4. Wave Mechanics
-
-
-
-
118
5. Angular Momentum (Moment of Momentum) in Wave Mechanics
-
127
6. The Statistical Interpretation of Wave Mechanics
-
130
CHAPTER VI
SPIN OF THE ELECTRON AND PAULI'S PRINCIPLE
1. Alkali Doublets and the Spinning Electron
136
2. The Anomalous Zeeman Effect
140
3. The Hydrogen Atom and X-ray Terms
-
148
4. The Helium Atom -
-
152
5. Pauli's Exclusion Principle
-
159
6. The Periodic System. Closed Shells -
160
7. Magnetism
-
-
-
-
166
8. Wave Theory of the Spin Electron
-
169
9. Application of Wave Mechanics to the Nucleus -
-
176
CHAPTER VII
QUANTUM STATISTICS
1. Heat Radiation and Planck's Law -
-
185
2. Specific Heat of Solids and of Polyatomic Gases
-
194


===== PDF PAGE 0011 =====

CONTENTS
xi
Page
3. Quantisation of Cavity Radiation
-
201
4. Bose-Einstein Statistics of Light Quanta
-
-
203
5. Einstein's Theory of Gas Degeneration
-
212
6. Fermi-Dirac Statistics
-
-
-
-
214
7. Electron Theory of Metals. Energy Distribution
217
8. Thermionic and Photoelectric Effect in Metals -
-
-
220
9. Magnetism of the Electron Gas
-
223
10. Electrical and Thermal Conductivity. Thermoelectricity
-
-
-
224
CHAPTER VIII
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
1. Molecular Properties as an Expression of the Distribution of Charge in
the Electronic Cloud
-
-
228
2. Experimental Determination of the Molecular Constants
-
-
230
3. Band Spectra and the Raman Effect
4. Chemical Binding. Classification of Types of Binding
-
5. Theory of Heteropolar Ionic Binding
-
6. Theory of Valency Binding
-
-
-
7. Theory of van der Waals Forces and other Kinds of Binding
8. Conclusion -
-
ZD%
APPENDIX
I. Evaluation of Some Integrals Connected with the Kinetic Theory
of Gases
-
259
II. Heat Conduction, Viscosity, and Diffusion -
-
-
-
261
III. Van der Waals' Equation of State
-
265
IV. The Mean Square Deviation
-
266
V. Theory of Relativity
--
269
VI. Electron Theory
-
-
272
VII. The Theorem of the Inertia of Energy
-
274
VIII. Calculation of the Coefficient of Scattering for Radiation of Short
Wave-length
-
275
IX. Rutherford's Scattering Formula for x-rays
- 276
X. The Compton Effect
- 279
XI. Phaso Velocity and Group Velocity -
-
- 281
XII. Elementary Derivation of Heisenberg's Uncertainty Relation
-
282
XIII. Hamiltonian Theory and Action Variables -
-
-
283


===== PDF PAGE 0012 =====

xii
CONTENTS
Page
XIV. Quantisation of the Elliptic Orbits in Bohr's Theory -
- 286
XV. The Oscillator according to Matrix Mechanics -
-
291
XVI. The Oscillator according to Wave Mechanics
295
XVII. The Vibrations of a Circular Membrane -
297
XVIII. Solution of Schrödinger's Equation for the Kepler Problem
-
298
XIX. The Resultant Angular Momentum
-
302
XX. Deduction of Rutherford's Scattering Formula by Wave Me-
chanics -
-
304
XXI. Deduction of the Selection Rules for the Kepler Problem
308
XXII. The Formalism of Quantum Mechanics, and the Uncertainty
Relation -
-
312
XXIII. Anomalous Zeeman Effect in the D Lines of Sodium -
- 318
XXIV. Enumeration of the Terms in the case of two p-Electrons -
-
319
XXV. Temperature Variation of Paramagnetism
-
-
322
XXVI. Theory of Nuclear Disintegration
-
-
-
326
XXVII. The Stefan-Boltzmann Law and Wien's Displacement Law
329
XXVIII. Absorption by an Oscillator -
-
-
333
XXIX. Temperature and Entropy in Quantum Statistics
-
336
XXX. Thermionic Emission of Electrons -
-
338
XXXI. Theory of Valency Binding
-
340
XXXII. Theory of the van der Waals Forces
- 343
Bibliography
- 347
Index -
-
-
349


===== PDF PAGE 0013 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS
CHAPTER I
Kinetic Theory of Gases
1. Atomic Theory in Chemistry.
In present-day physics, the concepts of energy and matter are
connected in the most intimate way with atomic theory. We therefore
begin with a brief discussion of the rise of ideas relating to the atom.
The source of these ideas, we know, is chemistry. They suggest them-
selves almost inevitably when we try to interpret the simple regu-
larities which are at once disclosed when the masses of the substances
transformed in chemical reactions are determined quantitatively with
the balance. It is established in the first place, that in a reaction the
total weight remains unchanged. Secondly, it is found that substances
combine only in fixed simple proportions by weight, so that a definite
weight of one substance can only enter into reaction with definite
weights of a second substance; and the ratio of these weights is inde-
pendent of the external conditions, such as, for example, the proportion
by weight in which the two substances may have been mixed. These
regularities are expressed in the language of the chemist in the laws of
constant and of multiple proportions (Proust, 1799; Dalton, 1808). E.g.:
1 gm. hydrogen combines with 8 gm. oxygen to form 9 gm. water,
1 gm. hydrogen combines with 35•5 gm. chlorine to form 36•5 gm. hydrogen chloride.
An example of the law of multiple proportions is given by the
compounds of nitrogen and oxygen: 7 gm. nitrogen combine with
1 X 4 gm. oxygen to form 11 gm. nitrous oxide,
2 × 4
15 , nitric oxide,
3 × 4
19 , nitrous anhydride,
1X4
23
" nitrogen dioxide,
5X4
27 " nitric anhydride.
1


===== PDF PAGE 0014 =====

2
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
In the case of gases, simple laws hold not only for the weights of
the reacting substances but also for their volumes (Gay-Lussac, 1808).
Thus (at constant pressure)
2 vols. hydrogen combine with 1 vol. oxygen to form 2 vols. water vapour,
1 vol. hydrogen combines with 1 vol. chlorine to form 2 vols. hydrogen chloride.
The numbers expressing the ratios by volume are those which
appear in the corresponding chemical formula.
In the preceding
examples, for instance, we have
2H2 + 02 = 2H,0,
H2 + Cl2 = 2HCl;
and
2N2 + 02 = 2N,0,
2N2 + 202 = 4N0,
2N2 + 302 = 2N20g,
2N2 + 402 = 4N02,
2N2 + 502 = 2N7205
These facts may be interpreted as follows, as was done by Avogadro:
every gas consists of a great number of particles, its atoms or mole-
cules; and equal volumes of all gases, at the same temperature and
pressure, contain the same number of molecules.
The significance of this principle in relation to the laws of chemical
reactions may be illustrated from the above examples. The fact that
two volumes of hydrogen combine with one volume of oxygen to
form two volumes of water vapour is (Avogadro, 1811) equivalent to
the statement that two molecules of hydrogen combine with one mole-
cule of oxygen to form two molecules of water. Similarly, the com-
bination of one part by weight of hydrogen with cight parts by weight
of oxygen to form nine parts by weight of water means that a molecule
of oxygen must be eight times, and two molecules of water nine times,
as heavy as two molecules of hydrogen.
We are thus led to the concepts of molecular weight and atomic
weight. These are, respectively, the weights of a molecule and of an
atom of the substance in question. They are not measured in grammes,
but with reference to a standard (ideal) gas, the atomic weight of which
is put equal to l; and it has been agreed to define this, not so that
H = 1, but so that 0 = 16; this convention has turned out very lucky
(because of the existence of the heavy isotope of hydrogen, p. 59).
We shall denote the molecular weight measured in this way by u.


===== PDF PAGE 0015 =====

ATOMIC THEORY IN CHEMISTRY
3
That quantity of a substance, the weight of which is u gm., is called
a mole (even when the substance is not capable of existence in the
chemical sense). A mole of oxygen atoms therefore weighs 16 gm., but
a mole of oxygen molecules weighs 32 gm. From this definition of the
mole it follows that the quantity " 1 mole" always contains the same
number of molecules. This number of molecules per mole plays a great
part in the kinetic theory of gases; we denote it by I after the physicist
Loschmidt, who first determined it (1865). According to the usual
custom with regard to scientific nomenclature it should be called
"Loschmidt's number"
, and this is the expression used in the
German literature, but in other languages it is called Avogairo's
number. Its value is (see p. 22)
L = 6-06 × 1023 mole-1.
As a consequence of Avogadro's law, 1 mole of any gas at a given
pressure pand a given temperature I always occupies the same volume;
for a pressure of 760 mm. of mercury and a temperature of 0° C. the
volume is 22•4 litres.
We add here an explanation of a number of symbols which will
be employed below. If m is the mass of a molecule in grammes, then
M= Im; in particular, for atomic hydrogen (u almost exactly : 1),
Im= =1. If further n is the number of molecules in the unit of volume,
IN that in the volume V, and if v is the number of moles in the volume
V, then we have vL =nV = N. Finally, we denote by p: nm the
density of the gas, and by u, = 1/p its specific volume.
2. Fundamental Assumptions of the Kinetic Theory of Gases.
After these prefatory remarks on the atomic theory in chemistry,
we now proceed to the kinetic theory of gases (Herapath, 1821;
Krönig, 1856). Considering the enormous number of particles in
unit volume of a gas, it would of course be a perfectly hopeless
undertaking to attempt to describe the state of the gas by speci-
fying the position and velocity of every individual particle. As
in all phenomena of matter in bulk, we must here have recourse
to statistics. But the statistics now to be used is of a somewhat
different kind from that which we are acquainted with in ordinary
life. There, the statistical method consists in recording a large number
of events which have occurred, and in drawing conclusions from the
numerical data so obtained. Thus, mortality statistics onswers the
question of how much more probable it is that a man will die at 60
than at 20 years of age; for this purpose we count the number of


===== PDF PAGE 0016 =====

4
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
cases of deaths of men at these ages over a long period, and take the
respective numbers found for the two ages as proportional to the
probabilities required.
If we propose to apply the statistical method to the theory of
gases, the method of procedure must be essentially different; for an
enumeration of the molecules which, for example, occupy a given
element of volume at a given moment is utterly impossible. We must
therefore proceed indirectly, first introducing assumptions which appear
plausible, and then building up the theory on these as foundation.
As with every scientific theory, the final warrant for the correctness
of the assumptions is the agreement of their logical consequences
with experience.
We may wish, for example, to know the probability of finding
a gas molecule at a definite spot in the box within which we suppose
the gas to have been enclosed. If no external forces act on the mole-
cules, we shall be unable to give any reason why a particle of gas should
be at one place in the box rather than at another. Similarly, in this
case there is no assignable reason why a particle of the gas should
move in one direction rather than in another. We therefore introduce
the following hypothesis, the principle of molecular chaos: For the
molecules of gas in a closed box, in the absence of external forces,
all positions in the box and all directions of velocity are equally probable.
In the kinetic theory of gases we shall only have to do with mean
values, such as time averages, space averages, mean values over all
directions, and so on. Individual values entirely elude observation.
If na denotes the number of molecules per unit volume with a definite
property a, e.g. with a velocity of definite magnitude, or with à definite
x-component of velocity, then by the mean value of a we understand
the quantity à, where
or nà = End,
Ing
n standing for Ina, the number of molecules per cubic centimetre. If,
for example, we suppose the velocity of each molecule to be repre-
sented by a vector o with the components 5, n, 5, and therefore the
magnitude v = V (5 + 73 + 53), and we wish to find the mean value
§ (for molecules with the velocity v), then by the principle of mole-
cular chaos with respect to directions of motion, exactly as many
molecules of the gas will have a velocity component + 5 as a com-
ponent -¿; the mean value & must therefore vanish. A value of 3


===== PDF PAGE 0017 =====

FUNDAMENTAL ASSUMPTIONS
differing from zero would imply a mean motion of the whole gas in
the direction concerned, with this mean velocity.
On the contrary, ¿? is not equal to zero. From symmetry, we have
=7=53.
If we take the mean value over all directions, keeping o fixed, then it
follows from v = * + n+ 52 by taking the mean values that
3. Calculation of the Pressure of a Gas.
With these ideas before us, we are already in a position to cal
culate the gas pressure p as the force acting on unit area (D
Bernoulli, 1738; Krönig, 1856; Clausius, 1857). According to th
kinetic theory of gases, this force is equal to the change
of momentum of the molecules striking unit of area of
the wall per second. Take the x-axis at right angles
•Fat
of aren struck.
to the wall. If ny denotes the number of molecules in a cubic
centimetre which possess the velocity o, then in the small time dt a
given square centimetre of the wall is struck by all those molecules
which at the beginning of the time element dt
were within the oblique cylinder with edge odt
mE
standing on the square centimetre of the wall
(fig. I). Since the height of this cylinder is §dt,
Fix. 2.- Momentum diagram for clastic collision of a molecule with
-mE
he wall; the energy, the magnitude of the momentum and the component
momentum parallel to the wall are not changed by the collision, but the
component perpendicular to the wall has its sion reversed: momentum
2m$ is therefore communicated to the wall.
its volume is also Edt; the number of molecules in it is therefore
noidt. The arca of the wall considered is struck per unit time by
Nus molecules with the velocity o.
If we think of the molecules as billiard balls, every molecule when
it strikes the wall has its momentum changed by 2m5 perpendicular
to the wall; the component of momentum parallel to the wall is not
altered (fig. 2). The molecules considered therefore contribute to the
(E 908)
2


===== PDF PAGE 0018 =====

6
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
total pressure p the part 2m ny. We sum these values first over all
directions of incidence, that is to say, over a hemisphere, keeping o
fixed.
The sum in the present case is equal to half the sum over a com-
plete sphere, so that we have
where n, is the number of molecules in a cubic centimetre with a velocity
of magnitude v. If we now sum further over all magnitudes of the
velocity, we find for the total pressure
If V is the total volume of the gas, and N the total number of
molecules, it follows from this equation on multiplication by V,
since nV = vL = N, that
m-
Vp = N
where we have put
Clearly U denotes the mean kinetic energy per mole, and in monatomic
gases is identical with the total energy of the molecules in a mole. In
polyatomic molecules the relations are more complicated, on account
of the occurrence of rotations of the molecules, and vibrations of the
atoms within a molecule. It can be shown, however, that the pre-
ceding formula for the gas pressure holds in this case also; U denotes
as before the mean kinetic energy of the translational motion of the
molecules, per mole, but it is no longer the same as the total energy.
4. Temperature of a Gas.
From the kinetic theory of gases, without a knowledge of the law
of distribution of velocities (i.e. of the way in which the number n
depends on v), we have found that the product of pressure and volume
is a function only of the mean kinetic energy of the gas. But we have
also an empirical law, the law of Boyle (1660) and Mariotte (1676), viz.:
at constant temperature the product of the pressure and volume of an
ideal gas is constant. We must conclude from this that U, the mean
kinetic energy per mole, depends only on the temperature of the gas.


===== PDF PAGE 0019 =====

I]
TEMPERATURE OF A GAS
7
In the kinetic theory of gases, the concept of temperature is primarily
a foreign element, since in fact the individual molecules are charac-
terized by their velocity alone. But it suggests itself that we should
define the absolute gas-temperature I in terms of the mean kinetic
energy. This is usually done in accordance with the equation
т-
= I,
where on the left we have the mean kinetic energy of a component of
the motion of the centre of inertia of a molecule; k is called Boltz-
mann's constant. For the total motion of the centre of inertia we have
therefore also
and, referred to a mole,
3
-RI,
where we put
Lk = R.
The justification for this definition of temperature lies in the fact
that when we introduce the last expression in the formula for the gas
pressure deduced above, we obtain formally the relation which com-
bines the laws of Boyle-Mariotte and of Gay-Lussac and Charles:
pV = VRT.
R is called the absolute gas constant, and can easily be calculated from
measurements of three corresponding values of p, V, and T. Its value is
R = 8•313 103 erg degree-1 mole-1 = 1•986 cal degree -1 mole-.
We refrain from entering here upon a thoroughgoing discussion of the
preceding definition of temperature from the thermodynamic and
axiomatic point of view (a complete treatment for the generulized
statistics introduced by the quantum theory is given in Appendix
XXIX, p. 336), and merely add a brief remark on the units
which temperature is measured.
We use the phrase ideal gas if the product pV is constant at con-
stant temperature; for low pressures this is true for every gas. Devia-
tions from the ideal character of the gas occur when the density of the
gas becomes so great that the mean distance between two gas mole-


===== PDF PAGE 0020 =====

8
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[Снар.
cules is comparable with the molecular diameter. If we employ such
an ideal gas as thermometric substance, the centigrade scale is de-
fined as follows.. Let (pV), be the value of pV for the gas, when it is
brought into contact with melting ice, and (pV), its value for con-
tact with boiling water;* then the temperature of the gas, for the
general case of any value of pV, is defined according to the centigrade
scale by
+ = 100 V - (pV),
(pV) - (PV)S
We see at once that, with this definition, the temperature of melting
ice is 0° C. and that of boiling water 100° C.
The change from the centigrade scale to the absolute temperature
(Lord Kelvin, 1854) scale, which we have indicated above by the
symbol I, is made as follows. It has been established experimentally
that at constant pressure an ideal gas expands by 1/273 of its volume
at 0° C. when its temperature is raised by 1° C., so that we have, c.g.,
373
(p). = I0 = 1 + 208
273
If we retain the unit of the centigrade scale in the absolute scale also,
I's and I, must differ by 100°. It follows that melting ice (t = 0° C.)
has the absolute temperature If = 273°
, and boiling water (t = 100° C.)
the absolute temperature T, = 373°
The zero of the absolute tem-
perature scale lies therefore at - 273° C.
It may be remarked that the absolute temperature scale is some-
times called the Kelvin scale, and to distinguish it from the ordinary
centigrade scale is denoted by K.
5. Specific Heat.
The specific heat (referred to 1 mole) of a substance is given by the
energy which must be supplied to the substance to raise its tempera-
ture by l°. For a monatomic gas, it follows immediately from this
definition that the specific heat at constant volume is
dU
=R.
If heat energy is supplied, but with the pressure kept constant instead
of the volume, the gas expands and so does work against the external
* f= freezing-point, b = boiling-point.


===== PDF PAGE 0021 =====

I]
SPECIFIC HEAT
9
pressure (which of course in the case of equilibrium must be equal
and opposite to the pressure of the gas), the work being
PAV = RAT, i.e.=R for AT = 1°.
Thus & is that portion of the specific heat which corresponds to the
work of expansion; if we add to this work the specific heat at constant
volume {R, we obtain for the total specific heat at constant pressure
The ratio co/c, is generally denoted by y. Hence, for a monatomic gas
we have the relation (Clausius, 1857)
which agrees well with observation, especially for the inert gases.
In polyatomic molecules, besides the three degrees of freedom of
the translational motion, other degrees of freedom come in, which
correspond to the rotations and vibrations of the molecules and which,
when energy is supplied to the gas, can also take up a part of the energy.
Now there is a general theorem, the theorem of equipartition (Clausius,
1857; Maxwell, 1860), according to which the specific heat is the product
of the number of kinetic degrees of freedom by k/2 referred to a mole-
cule, or by R/2 referred to 1 mole. For example, a diatomic molecule,
considered as rigid (dumb-bell model), possesses essentially two
rotational degrees of freedom. In counting the number of degrees
of freedom, the degree of freedom corresponding to rotation about
the axis joining the two atoms is to be ignored. For idealized atoms
concentrated at a point, this is obviously correct; when we take
account of the extension of the atoms in space, we encounter a con-
ceptual difficulty, which it requires the quantum theory to clear up
(see Chap. VII, § 2, p. 201). In this case we therefore have c, = 2R,
Cp = 2R, and consequently y = 0,/c, =% = 1•1. These values have
in fact been observed, e.g. in molecular oxygen.
6. Law of Distribution of Energy and Velocity.
As the next step in the development of the kinetic theory of gases,
we proceed to consider the law of distribution of energy or velocity
in a gas, i.e., in particular, the law of dependence of the quantity n,,
employed above, on the velocity. While up to this point a few simple
ideas have been sufficient for our purpose, we must now definitely
call to our aid the statistical methods of the Calculus of Probabilities.


===== PDF PAGE 0022 =====

IO
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
To begin with a simple example, let us in the first place, without
troubling about velocity, consider the question of the number of mole-
cules which on the average are to be found in a definite volume element
trom the tact that it is inherently impossible, ague be at little pase,
since the number changes every moment on account of the motion
of the molecules; we are therefore concerned only with the average
number of molecules. This we determine as follows. Imagine the whole
box containing the gas to be divided up into separate cells of sizes
w,, w?,..., w. (as an aid to the imagination we may picture every-
thing as two-dimensional, see fig. 3), and "throw" the molecules,
which we may think of as little balls, at random into this system
of cells. We then note that a definite number ny of balls has fallen
into the first cell, another number n, into the second cell, and so on.
At a second trial, we shall perhaps find other values for the number
of balls in the various cells. If we repeat the
experiment a great many times, we shall find
that a given distribution, defined by the numbers
Fig. 3.-Division into cells for the purpose of finding the most
wz
probable density of distribution of the molecules of a gas.
Ny, Nz,..., No, occurs not merely once, but many times. For a model
consisting of a real box divided up into cells, and real balls, the fre-
quency with which a given distribution appears could be determined
by a long series of trials. For a gas and its molecules this is not possible;
we have to use instead an arithmetical argument, consisting of a
numerical part (concerning the numbers n1, Nz,..., na) and a geometri-
cal part (concerning the sizes of the cells w,, wz,..., wa). In this way
we shall find the mathematical probability of a given distribution.
And, when we take all possible distributions into account, there is one,
for which this probability is greatest, the most probable distribution.
Because of the very great number of the molecules in the cubic centi-
metre, this maximum is overwhelmingly sharp, so that the probability
of any distribution deviating essentially from it is negligibly small.
It is therefore to be expected that the most probable distribution
represents the average state.
At this point, however, a question of principle must be considered.
The following difficulty presents itself. If we knew the exact position
and velocity of every particle of the gas at a definite moment, the
further course of the motion would be completely defined, for the
behaviour of the gas is then rigorously determined by the laws of


===== PDF PAGE 0023 =====

I]
ENERGY AND VELOCITY
II
mechanics, and appears from the very outset to have nothing to do
with the laws of probability. If we assume that at time t = 0 the posi-
tions and velocities of the molecules are distributed according to any
statistical law, we are not entitled without more ado to expect that at
any later time t the state of the gas will be determined by the play of
probabilities, independently of the initial state assumed. It would be
quite conceivable that, for the initial state chosen, all the molecules
would as a consequence of the laws of mechanics be found at the
moment t at a definite corner of the box. In order that it may be
possible to apply statistics at all, it must be stipulated that there is
no coupling of the states at difterent instants. We must suppose that
the collisions, conditioned by the laws of mechanics, by their enor-
mous number completely efface the "memory" of the initial state
after only a (macroscopically) short interval of time. Further, it has
to be borne in mind that measurements take time; what we deter-
mine is not the micro-state at the instant t at all, but its mean value
over a considerable period. It is assumed that the time-mean values
so determined are independent of the period chosen, and that they
agree with the mean values ascertained by considerations of proba-
bility alone from the most probable state defined above.
Although this hypothesis, the so-called quasi-ergodic hypothesis, is
very plausible, its rigorous proof presents difficulties which so far have
proved insurmountable. Recently (1932), however, the mathematicians
von Neumann and Birkhoff have proved a theorem which is virtually
equivalent to the quasi-ergodic theorem. According to the latest ideas
in theoretical physics, it is true, the problem of a rigorous proof of the
ergodic hypothesis has become unimportant, inasmuch as it is now
meaningless, as will be explained later, to give information about the
exact position of the individual molecules. To repeat: the hypothesis
asserts that even when the initial state is arbitrary a stationary state
is in time attained, owing to the collisions of the molecules with one
another and with the wall, and that this state is the same as the
state of greatest probability as defined above. It is assumed that
the walls of the box are "rough", so that they do not act as perfect
reflectors.
We return now to the calculation of the most probable distribution
of the molecules in the individual cells of the box. A definite distri-
bution is described by the numbers in the various cells my, Nz..., 2g;
their sum is of courso equal to the number of particles of gas in
the box:


===== PDF PAGE 0024 =====

I2
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
We denote the ratio of the size of the cell w, to the whole volume w
of the box by 9k = w//w; we have then
91+92+...+9*=1.
How often will this definite distribution actually occur? It is clear
in the first place that we obtain the same distribution, if we permute
the individual molecules among themselves; the number of these
permutations is n! Here, however, we are including the cases in which
the molecules in a given cell are permuted with one another; since
these permutations do not represent new possibilities of realization of
the distribution considered, we must divide n! by the number ny! of
the permutations within the first cell, and so on, and thus obtain for
the number of possibilities of realization
n!
ny! no!
... Na!
To get the probability of this distribution, we have still to multiply
this number by the a priori probability of the distribution, which is
917 g22... 9a, since the a priori probability that a particle should
fall into the first cell is g1, and therefore the same probability for n
particles is 91":, and so on. The probability of our distribution given by
the numbers n1, Na, ... therefore becomes
n!
W=
• 12"=.
MI! No!... ne!
To verify that in our calculation we have actually included all the
possibilities of realization, we can find the sum of the probabilities for
all possible distributions, which of course must be 1, since it is a
certainty that one of the distributions is realized. We therefore form
the sum over all distributions n1, ng.., for which not not ... ==n.
This sum is easily found by the polynomial theorem, which gives
n!
We now transform the above formula for the probability of a definite
distribution by means of Stirling's theorem, which for large values of
n gives
log n! = n(logn - 1).
We then obtain from the expression for W, by taking logarithms:
log W = const. + n1 log
91 + nig log 92 4 ....


===== PDF PAGE 0025 =====

I]
ENERGY AND VELOCITY
I3
To find the most probable distribution, we must calculate the maxi-
mum of log W for a variation of the numbers n1, Nz, ..., subject to the
subsidiary condition ny + nat ... + no=n.
Since Ny, Nz, ... are
very large we can treat them as continuous variables. By the method
of Lagrange's multipliers we obtain as the equations defining this
maximum
a log W
a log W
# = log 91
- 1 = 1,
= logJ2 - 1 = d,...,
where 1 is a constant, whose value is determined by the equation
N1t n= +...=1. It follows that
91 =
92
...= @1+1 = const.;
N2 = n92 =n
. . ...
Hence the numbers n1, No, ... in the individual cells are proportional
to the size of the cells; we therefore have a uniform distribution of the
molecules over the whole box; the size of the cells does not matter
at all.
While the result just deduced for the distribution of the density
of the molecules was to be expected from the start, the same method,
applied to the distribution of the velocity of the molecules, leads to
a new result. The calculations in this case are exactly analogous to
those above. We construct a " velocity space" by drawing lines from
a fixed point as origin, representing as vectors the velocities of the
individual molecules in magnitude and direction. We then investigate
the distribution of the ends of these vectors in the velocity space. In
this case as before we can make a partition into cells, and consider the
question of the number of vectors whose ends fall in a definite cell.
There is, however, one essential difference as compared with the former
case, in that there are now two subsidiary conditions, viz. besides the
condition
for the total number of particles, an additional condition for the total
energy E of the gas, viz.
where e, denotes the energy of a molecule, whose velocity vector points
into the cell l. Taking account of these two subsidiary conditions, we


===== PDF PAGE 0026 =====

I4
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
find for the maximum of the probability (Nand & being the two Lagran-
gian multipliers)
a log W
= 10g 51 - 1 = 1 + BEr (=1,2
,. .., 2).
This leads to Boltzmann's law of distribution (1896)
where A and B are two constants, which have to be found from the
two subsidiary conditions. Thus the expression for the number n
corresponding to the cell & essentially involves
the energy belonging to this cell as well as the
size g of the cell, and that in such a way that
equal size, Rose with great distribution or the all relo
than those with smaller energy.
EZ
among cells of equal size one with greater energy is not so well filled
as one with smaller energy; the fall in the value of the number ny
with increasing energy obeys an exponential law (fig. 4).
We shall now apply Boltzmann's law of distribution to the special
case of a monatomic gas. Here the energy is given by
+=M =5(58+18719)
Position in the velocity space is uniquely defined by the three com-
ponents 5, n, 5. From their meaning the cells g are finite. From the
macroscopic standpoint we can consider them as infinitesimal, and
denote them by deands. In the formation of mean values we can
then replace the sums by integrals:
9r...→JJ/ asands...,
the limits of integration being -co and +o in each case. Since
further we are interested in the mean values of v, vi
,... only (5, 7, 5
vanish from symmetry, and E, n, f? = 30), the integrand in each of
the integrals to be calculated depends on o only, which suggests that
we should introduce polar co-ordinates in the velocity space, with u
as radius. Integration with respect to the polar angles can be effected


===== PDF PAGE 0027 =====

I]
ENERGY AND VELOCITY
I5
at once, giving the factor In, the area of the unit sphere. We have
therefore
The total number n of the molecules is obtained from Boltzmann's
law by calculating the integral
while for the total energy we have
These two equations determine uniquely the two constants A and B,
which up to this point were unknown. The integrals are
readily
evaluated (see Appendix I, p. 259); we find the relations
3 n
But we have seen (p. 7) that on the average a molecule, corresponding
to its three translational freedoms, possesses the kinetic energy EkT.
Since the whole kinetic energy of the
gas is therefore ⅖nkT, it follows that
1
ß =
ili
!!!
The constants in Boltzmann's law are
accordingly expressed in terms of the
number of molecules in the gas and
Fig. 5.—Maxwell's law of distribution of
velocities, showing the most probable velocits
their absolute temperature.
(Up), the mean velocity (v), and the root-
We inquire next how many mole-
mean-square velocity Va.
cules have a velocity between v and v + du.
This number n, do is
clearly given by the integrand of the above integral for n:
This relation is known as Maxwell's law of distribution of velocity (1860);
the graph of n, as a function of v is shown in fig. 5.


===== PDF PAGE 0028 =====

I6
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
To obtain some idea of the order of magnitude of the velocities of
gas molecules, we can calculate from the law of distribution the most
probable velocity un, or the average velocity i, or other such mean
values (see Appendix I, p. 259); we find, e.g., for the most probable
velocity the value v, = V(2RT /M), so that, e.g., for molecular hydrogen
(M = 2) at 0° C. (I = 273º K.)
0 = 15.06 × 104 cm./sec.
An experimental test of Maxwell's law of distribution may be carried
out as follows. Let a furnace O contain a gas at a definite temperature
T. In the wall of the furnace let there be an opening through which
Ритр
the gas molecules can escape into a space which is highly
evacuated (fig. 6). The escaping molecules fly on in a straight
line with the velocity which they possessed in the furnace at
the moment of their exit through the opening. By means of
a diaphragm system behind the opening, the stream of mole-
cules issuing in all directions may be cut down to a molecular
ray (Dunoyer, 1911). The distribution of velocity in the ray,
or beam, can be measured directly by various methods, the
Fig. 6.-Diagrammatic representation of the production of a molecular ray. The
furnace O, which contains the gas, is heated from outside.
most important of which will be described immediately. When
deducing from this distribution the distribution of velocity in the
enclosed gas, we must, however, take the fact into account that rapid
molecules are relatively more numerous in the beam than in the gas.
For the beam consists of all molecules which issue through the opening
per unit time; the number of these is (§ 3, p. 6) proportional to
n"udo, whilst n, do represents the number of particles having the same
range of velocity in the gas. The two distributions therefore difter
from each other by the factor v.
A direct method (Stern, 1920) of measuring the velocity in the beam
depends on the following principle. A beam, consisting, c.g., of silver
atoms, can easily be demonstrated by setting up in the path of the
beam a glass plate, on which the silver is deposited. If the apparatus
is then rotated about an axis perpendicular to the path of the beam,
the molecules are no longer deposited at the same spot on the glass
plate as when the tube was at rest, but at a greater or smaller distance
from this point according to their velocity, since, during the time of
flight of the molecules from the furnace to the glass plate, the tube
and with it the glass plate has turned. The distribution of velocity


===== PDF PAGE 0029 =====

I]
ENERGY AND VELOCITY
in the beam is therefore found immediately from the plate, by measuring
the intensity of the deposit at various distances from the original point.
A more recent method makes use of the same principle as was used
by Fizeau (1849) to measure the velocity of light, viz. that of coupled
rotating toothed wheels. Further details of the method need not be
gone into here. The measurements, as carried out mainly by Stern
and his pupils, showed that the distribution of velocity among the
molecules in the furnace does actually satisfy Maxwell's law.
Another method depends on the Doppler effect (1842). If a mole-
cule, which in the state of rest emits a definite frequency vo, moves
towards the observer with the relative velocity component v,, the light
appears to him to be displaced in the direction of higher frequencies
by the factor 1 + v,/c; while for the opposite relative motion the cor-
responding factor is 1 - v,/c. When the light which is emitted by a
luminous gas is spectrally decomposed, then besides the frequency yo
there occur also all frequencies which are derived from v in con-
sequence of the Doppler effect due to the motion of the molecules,
and that with an intensity which is given by the number of molecules
with a definite component of velocity relative to the observer. Each
spectral line has therefore a finite width, and the intensity distribu-
tion over its range gives a picture of Maxwell's law.
%. Free Path.
We have spoken above of a molecular ray. This consists of mole-
cules which have passed through the diaphragm system and fly on as
a beam through the evacuated space. A necessary condition is a high
vacuum. If, however, there is still a residue of gas in the space (with
molecules either of the same or of a different sort), then some of the
molecules in the beam, more or fewer according to the pressure, will col-
lide with the gas molecules and be scattered in the process; consequently
the molecular beam will be weakened, clearly, in fact, exponentially
with the distance travelled, since the number of scattering processes
is proportional to the number of molecules present in the beam. If then
we denote by n(s) the number of beam molecules which, after traversing
a distance s from the opening in the furnace, pass through a plane
at right angles to the beam per unit time, we have a law of the form
n(s) = n(0)e-511.
Here l is a quantity (to be determined later) of the dimensions of a
length; a little consideration shows that this quantity is equal to the
distance which on the average a molecule of the beam covers before


===== PDF PAGE 0030 =====

I8
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
it comes into collision with a molecule of the gas outside the beam.
For, putting 1/l = B, we have for this average
So sn(s) ds
n =
S. 2(s) ds
S. e-rads
= 28(1085 20) = 1(108)
We therefore call " the mean free path" of the ray in the gas (Clausius,
1858). The present author, together with E. Bormann, has shown
(1921) how it can be determined on the basis of its definition by
the exponential law, by measuring the attenuation of a beam of
silver atoms on passage through the gas which is at rest (air). The
more important case is that in which beam and gas
consist of molecules of the same kind; the mean free
path l is then a property of this gas.
The question of the quantities on which the mean free
mass of the two equal molecules cannot come nearer than the distance
Fig. 7 - Gas-kinetic effective cross-section; in a collision the centres af
(0 = diameter of a molecule).
path must depend may be examined theoretically. Clearly it is a matter
of the number of collisions with the molecules of the gas, in which a
definite molecule takes part during its passage through the gas. We may
regard the other molecules of the gas as at rest; to take their motion
into account does not make any essential difference. We shall regard the
molecules as spheres of diameter o, and have to answer the question
of how many collisions such a moving sphere is involved in, during
its flight through the gas, which consists of spheres at rest.
Since a
collision occurs whenever the centre of the moving molecule, in the
course of its flight, comes nearer the centre of a molecule at rest
than the distance o, we may also obtain the number of these collisions
by considering spheres of radius o at rest, and a moving point (fig. 7).
We have therefore the same problem before us as when a man fires a
gun in a wood, and considers the question of the number of trees he has
struck. The number is clearly proportional to the thickness of an in-
dividual tree, and to the number per unit area; its reciprocal determines
the mean range of the bullets. In the case of the gas also, the collision


===== PDF PAGE 0031 =====

FREE PATH
I9
number must be proportional to the number n of the molecules of gas
per unit volume and to their (gas-kinetic) cross-section o". since the
mean free path is inversely proportional to this collision number, it is
proportional to
where V is the volume per mole.
Measurement of the mean free path l therefore throws light upon
the value of the product Lo?. A direct method of determining I (for
AD to indirect ele df, origa dentin has already be i ive by bore.
well (1860), depending on the conduction of heat in the gas (Appen-
dix II, p. 261). If the gas molecules did not collide, a rise in tempera-
ture anywhere in the gas, that is to say, an increase in the kinetic
energy of the particles, would be propagated through the gas with the
great velocity of the molecules, say a thousand metres per second;
experimentally, however, gases are found to be relatively poor con-
ductors of heat. The reason for this is that a gas molecule can fly for
only a relatively short distance, of the order of magnitude of the free
path, before it collides with another particle of gas, and thus not only
changes its direction of motion, but also gives up a part of its kinetic
energy to the particle it has struck. Other methods for the deter-
mination of l depend on viscosity and on diffusion (Appendix II, p. 263).
The latter method lends itself well to visual demonstration; if, for
example, we let chlorine gas diffuse into air, then, since the colour of
the chlorine makes it visible, we can observe directly how slowly the
diffusion goes on.
From these experiments, taken together, we find for the order of
magnitude of the mean free path at a pressure of l atmosphere, l ~ 10-6
cm.; at a pressure of 10-* mm. of mercury, which corresponds to the
normal X-ray vacuum, l ~ 10 cm.
8. Determination of Avogadro's Number.
As has already been remarked above, when the free path is known
so is the product Lo?, ie. the product of the square of the molecular
diameter and Avogadro's (Loschmidt's) number. To determine o
and L separately, we need a second relation between them. Such a
relation is given, at least in respect of order of magnitude, by the
molar volume of the solid body. In the solid state of aggregation, it is
reasonable to suppose that the molecules are in the state of densest


===== PDF PAGE 0032 =====

20
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
packing, so that the volume taken up by 1 mole-up to a factor of the
order of magnitude 1-is given by the product of the number of mole-
cules per mole and the volume taken up by one molecule, i.e. by Lo?.
From Lo? and Los we can now determine I and o, so obtaining
I~ 1023 mol-1, o ~ 10-8 cm.
Moreover, the influence of the "proper volume" of the molecules
is shown not only in the most condensed state (the solid body), but
even in the gaseous state by deviations from the law of ideal gases
pV = RT.
Thus, if the volume V of a definite mass of gas becomes so reduced
that the proper volume of the molecules is actually comparable with
V, then the free volume at the disposal of the individual molecule is
smaller than V, and we obtain the equation of state
P(V - b) = RT.
The exact calculation gives for b four times the proper volume of the
molecules. (For spherical particles of diameter o,
6=4L.
1T (0/2)8=
3
see Appendix III, p. 265). In dense gases, however, there are also
other deviations from the ideal equation of state, which are due to the
cohesion of the molecules, and have the general eftect of making the
pressure, for given I' and V, smaller than it is according to the formula
PV = RT. To represent these circumstances, many equations of state
have been proposed; the best known is that of van der Waals (1881),
(pt.
g) (r -b) = RT.
What chiefly interests us here, is that by determination of the con-
stant b we again obtain the product Los. At pp. 253, 339 we shall
return to the question of the value of a, which measures the cohesion.
The evaluation of Avogadro's number given above is of course
rather rough. We get a more exact method by considering fluctuation
phenomena. Thus, if we take 1 cm.3 of a gas, we shall find exactly as
many molecules in it as in another cm.?, viz., at room temperature,
about 1019, differences of a few hundred molecules in these huge
numbers are of course of no moment. It is another matter if we pass to


===== PDF PAGE 0033 =====

I]
DETERMINATION OF AVOGADRO'S NUMBER
2I
smaller elements of volume; in a cube of edge 0•1 u there are on the
average only 10t molecules, and it is clear that varintions of a few
hundred molecules are now relatively quite important. If we go on
to smaller regions still, we shall finally arrive at volumes which con-
tain only one or two molecules, or none at all. The smaller, therefore,
the number of particles considered, the greater will the fluctuations
be (Appendix IV, p. 266).
Examples of these fluctuation phenomena are given by the Brownian
movement (1828), which is observed with microscopic particles (eg.
colloidal solutions, or smoke in air), and manifests itself macrosco-
pically in the oscillations of a mirror suspended by a fine wire; also
by the sedimentation of suspensions, in which colloidal particles by
reason of their weight tend to sink to the bottom of the vessel, but
in consequence of collisions with the particles of the solvent are im-
pelled more or less upwards, thus giving rise to a density distribution
of the same character as that in the atmosphere, expressed in the
barometric height formula. A third example is the scattering of light
in the atmosphere (Lord Rayleigh, 1871), which causes the colour of the
sky. If, in fact, the density of air were the same throughout, then just
as in an ideal crystal there would be no scattering of light, since the
scattered waves leaving individual molecules would annul each other
by interference; the sky would appear black. Scattering is only possible
when there are irregularities in the uniformity of distribution, i.e.
fluctuations of density; indeed these fluctuations must be so pronounced
that they are perceptible within a distance of the order of maguitude
of a wave-length. Since the fluctuations in small volumes are greater.
short (blue) waves are more strongly scattered than long (red) waves;
the sky therefore appears blue.
A much more exact determination of I depends on its connexion
with the elementary electrical charge e, and the electrolytic unit, the
faraday. In electrolysis, we have the following fundamental law,
discovered by Faraday (1833). In the electrolytic separation of 1 mole
of any substance, a quantity of electricity is transported equal to
96,540 coulombs; i.c.
eL = # = 96,540 coulombs.
The interpretation is obviously that every ion carries the same ele-
mentary charge e (see § 1, p. 14) and that the total amount of elec-
tricity transported is e times the number of atoms. If then we know
e, we can calculate from it the value of I, or ofmy: 1/L. A method for
determining e was devised by threnhaft (1909) and Millikan (1910), and
( E 908


===== PDF PAGE 0034 =====

22
KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
[CHAP.
the latter has developed it to high precision. If electricity actually con-
sists of elementary quanta, the total charge on a body must be an
integral multiple of the charge e. Owing to the smallness of the elemen-
tary charge, it is of course difficult to test the truth of this by experi-
ments on macroscopic charged bodies. Such experiments offer little
prospect of success unless the whole
+
charge consists of very few quanta; it
actually does so in Millikan's oil-drop
Fig. 8.-Condenser in Millikan's method of deter-
nining the elementary charge e
The weight Mg is
compensated by an electric field E
method (fig. 8). The charge on an oil droplet may be determined
with sufficient exactness, by bringing it into the field of a condenser
whose lines of force are directed vertically upwards. There are then
two forces acting on the particle in opposite directions, viz. the
electric force upwards, and the force of gravity downwards; the
droplet will be in equilibrium if the potential difference applied to the
condenser is just so chosen that
eE = Mg,
where e and M are the charge and mass of the oil-drop, E is the electric
field strength, and g is the acceleration of gravity. The greatest diffi-
culty is the determination of the mass M. It can be calculated from the
density and the radius of the drop, if it is assumed that the density
has its normal value. The radius is determined by switching off the
electric field, so that the particle falls; and then measuring the velocity
of descent, which, in consequence of the viscosity of the surrounding
medium, is constant. Inserting this velocity in the formula called
Stokes's law, we obtain the radius of the droplet. The experiment,
as carried out by Millikan and others, not only proved without am-
biguity that the charge on the droplets consists of integral multiples
of an elementary quantum, but also allowed an exact determination
to be made of this elementary charge e; the value found is
e = 4•77 × 10-10 electrostatic units.
By using this result in Faraday's law, we obtain for Avogadro's number
the value
L = 6•06 X 1023 molecules per mole.
We may also refer here to various methods for the determination of I,
which make use of the radiations from radioactive substances. We may,


===== PDF PAGE 0035 =====

DETERMINATION OF AVOGADRO'S NUMBER
23
e.g., count the number of particles, either by noting the scintillations
produced when they strike a screen moistened with zinc sulphide, or
with the help of the Geiger counter. If we know the mass of our
sample and the decay constant, we can calculate L.
In conclusion, it may be mentioned in addition that the Boltzmann
constant k, which by definition is the quotient of the gas constant R
by Avogadro's number, can be also measured directly by determining
the spectral distribution of intensity in the radiation emitted by a black
body. The function which expresses the intensity in terms of the fre-
quency and the temperature involves only two universal constants,
ki and h, the first of which is Boltzmann's constant; the second is called
Planck's constant, and is the fundamental constant of the quantum
theory (Chap. VII, § 1, p. 185).


===== PDF PAGE 0036 =====

CHAPTER II
Elementary Particles
1. Conduction of Electricity in Rarefied Gases.
The development of chemistry and of the kinetic theory of gases
has led, as explained in the preceding chapter, to the assumption that
matter consists of molecules and atoms. For the chemist these particles
represent the ultimate constituents of which solids, liquids, and gases
are composed, and on which he acts in every reaction produced by
purely chemical means.
We now take up this question of the smallest components of matter
from the point of view of the physicist. The latter has many other
phenomena at his command, from the study of which he can collect
data upon the structure of matter. Among these phenomena, the
processes which occur when electricity passes through rarefied gases
have proved to be of special importance.
Under normal conditions, a gas is in general a poor conductor of
electricity. If, however, the gas is enclosed in a vessel with two elec-
trodes to which a sufficiently high potential is applied, it is found
that at pressures of a few millimetres of mercury, a transport of
electricity takes place across the gas, showing itself by the flow of an
electric current in the external leads to the electrodes; and that at
the same time the gas becomes strongly illuminated, & phenomenon
which from the theoretical point of view is somewhat complicated,
but which in the form of the so-called Geissler tubes is extensively
employed in practice, especially for illuminated signs.
If the pressure of the enclosed gas is reduced still further, the
illumination disappears (below 0•1 mm. of mercury) almost completely.
At very low pressures (about 10-5 to 10-6 mm.), however, the presence
of rays is observed, proceeding from the cathode and producing a
fluorescent appearance on the opposite wall of the glass tube.
In
certain circumstances these rays can be seen directly in the form of
24


===== PDF PAGE 0037 =====

CHAP. Il] ELECTRICITY IN RAREFIED GASES
25
a bluish thread, stretching from the cathode across the tube. The
rays are called cathode rays (fig. I).
Their properties can be investigated as follows (Plücker, 1858;
Hittorf, J. J. Thomson). If a body is placed in the path of the rays, it
is seen to cast a shadow on the fluorescent part of the glass. From the
geometrical relations it can be inferred that
the rays producing the shadow spread out in
144
Fig. 1.-How the cathode rays arise. The ruys proceed from
the cathode C, and can be seen as a bluish thread if the gaseous
5252=25E2355233
pressure in the tube is not too small. A is the anode. The propa-
gation of the rays in struight lines from the cathode is due to the
is closed by a weak transport of positive ions.
straight lines. It is found also that the occurrence of these rays is
associated with a transport of clectric charge across the tube. More-
over, the rays can be deflected from their rectilinear path by external
electric or magnetic fields, and that in such a way as to permit
the inference that the rays consist of rapidly moving, negatively
charged particles; they are called electrons.
The velocity and the specific charge (i.c. the ratio e/m of charge to
mass) of these particles can also be determined. If we set up two wire
gratings in the path of the rays and at right angles to their direction
(fig. 2), and apply to them a potential difter-
+
ence V, the electrons in the longitudinal
electric field between the gratings are accelerated
or retarded. The change of speed due to their
passage across the field is given by the equa-
tion of energy. If t, is their velocity before,
by the charge -e of the electron.
and o their velocity after passing through the field, then for the case
where the field is in the opposite direction to the velocity so that the
negative electrons are accelerated,
th.
2
When the initial velocity is small, we may put do ~ 0, i.e.
2


===== PDF PAGE 0038 =====

26
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
If V is known, we can therefore determine in this way the value of (m/e)u.
The same quantity can also be measured by deflection in a trans-
verse electric field (fig. 3). If two condenser plates are set up parallel
to the path of the rays and at a distance
lapart, and a potential difference V is
Fig. 3.-Deflection of an electron in a transverse
act is a parabet (path oplaroie a condenser). The
applied to them, a constant deflecting force eV /I acts on the electrons
perpendicular to their original direction of motion. Their path is
therefore a parabola, which is defined by the equations
where vo is the initial velocity, and g = (e/m)(V/l) is the acceleration
due to the field. Elimination of the time t gives
e. V x?
m
V x°
or
e
By measuring the deflection y of the ray after it has traversed a dis-
tance x, we can therefore again find the value of
the quantity (m/e)u.
In a magnetic field Il we know that a moving
charge e is acted on by a force which is perpendicular
both to the direction of the field and to that of the
velocity; the magnitude of this so-called Lorents force
is given by e(v/c)Hl, multiplied by the sine of the angle
Fig. 4.-Motion of an electron in a constant magnetic field H; the path
is in general a helix, with its axis parallel to the field; in the special case
he to do no an
when the electron moves at right angles to H, the path is a circle.
between the directions of velocity and field (c = 300,000 km./sec.
= the velocity of light). The path of the electron is a helix, whose
axm po pat velocity parallel to 1 valinte, the cial ca so when the
a circle perpendicular to the field. Its radius r is easily calculated.
The Lorentz force e(v/c)H is directed towards the centre of the
circle. It must obviously be equal to the centrifugal force mur, so that
mo-
H = -


===== PDF PAGE 0039 =====

II]
ELECTRICITY IN RAREFIED GASES
27
Measurement of the radius r and of the magnetic field strength there-
fore enables us to find the value of (m/e)v.
We thus obtain the result, that measurements of deflection give in
the electric field (m/e)v≥
, and in the magnetic field (me)u. Hence the
values of e/m and v can be determined. Actual measurements have
shown velocities which, with increasing potential difference across the
tube, reach near the velocity of light.
With regard to the measurement of e/m, exact experiments have
shown that this, the specific charge, is not precisely constant, but
depends to some extent on the velocity of the electrons (Kautmann,
1897). This phenomenon is explained by the theory of relativity (Ap-
pendix V, p. 269). According to Einstein (1905), the value of the charge
e is invariable; the mass, however, is variable, its magnitude in fact
depending upon the velocity which it has, relative to the observer who
happens to measure it. The electron may have the " rest mass" mo,
i.e. this is its mass for the case when it is at rest relative to the observer;
but if it moves relative to the observer with a velocity o, it behaves
(e.g. in a field of force) as if it possessed the mass
m =
mo
1-.
This assertion of the theory can be tested by deflection experiments
on cathode rays; these experiments confirm it completely (see § 1,
p. 11)
The result given by the deflection experiments for the limiting
value e/mo, i.e. for the specific charge of an electron reduced to zero
velocity, is
= 1840 F,
where E denotes Faraday's constant, i.e. represents the quantity of
electricity transported in the clectrolytic separation of 1 mole. It is
given (p. 21) by
F=
MII
where my is the mass of a hydrogen atom. For the rest-mass of the
electron we have therefore the relation
m, =
My = 9•0 x 10-28 gm.
1840


===== PDF PAGE 0040 =====

28
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
2. Canal Rays and Anode Rays (Positive Rays).
We have in the cathode rays made the acquaintance of electrically
negative charged particles. An obvious question now is: can we not pro-
duce positively charged rays also, in the same kind of way as the cathode
rays? The answer was given by Goldstein (1886), who succeeded in
producing such rays by the following method. If residues of gas are
still present in the discharge tube, the electrons on their way from the
cathode to the anode will collide with these residual gas molecules and
ionize them. The ions thus formed, being positively charged, will be
accelerated in the direction towards the cathode, in consequence of
the potential difference which exists across the discharge tube. They
therefore dash against the cathode, and
C
Fig. 5.—Production of canal rays; the positive ions pro-
duced in front of the cathode are driven up to the cathodeand
pass through the canals bored in it.
would of course stick fast in it unless, as Goldstein did, we bored
canals through the cathode, which allow the ions free passage (fig. J).
The rays so obtained are called canal rays.
Under certain conditions, positively charged rays issue also from
the anode, consisting of ions which have been torn out of the atomic
fabric of the anode; rays of this sort are called anode rays.
The properties of these positive rays can be determined by methods
analogous to those used for the cathode rays. From the deflection
experiments values are found for the specific charge of these particles,
of the order of magnitude of Faraday's number E'. In these rays,
therefore, we are concerned with singly or multiply charged atoms or
molecules (ions); and in fact the same values are found for the ratios
of the masses of these ions, as chemists have found by chemical
methods.
For the exact determination of the specific charge, an apparatus was
constructed (J. J. Thomson) in which the ions are deflected in an
electric field and a magnetic field parallel to it. If a photographic
plate is set up perpendicular to the original direction of the rays, the
image obtained on the plate is a family of parabolas (fig. 6, Plate I).
By a simple calculation (§ 1, p. 26) we can see that the points on
a definite parabola arise from a definite set of particles with the same
value of e/m; and that the individual points of this parabola corre-
spond to different velocities of the particles, in such a way in fact that
the marks due to the particles with smaller velocities, and therefore
more easily deflected, are farther away from the vertex of the para-


===== PDF PAGE 0041 =====

PLATE I
...
# - 16
44
Facing o. 2s
" 1
12-5-15
19-=-24
I и
44
16
3021
-14
11 Peo
--15
111
-13
--14
16- -
-
--12
Ch. II, Fig. S.-Examples of mass-spectra (from Aston's Isotopes,
by courtesy of the publishers, Edward Amold & Co.)
15-=-19
- -13
Na m
FT01
14--
11/
bUT 316
7-12
13--
- -16
12-=-15
66
28
=
101-
-64
11-I-14
11/
RANT
- 13
10- •
VIT
VINI
-0+*
(J. J. Thomson).
to be assigned to
Ch. II, Fig. 6.-Positive ray
Measurements on these deflection
photographs allow the individual
chemical elements and com-
pounds as indicated. The clectric
and magnetic deflecting fields are
pall to the common axis ol
parabolas
parabolas
1:008


===== PDF PAGE 0042 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0043 =====

II]
CANAL RAYS AND ANODE RAYS
29
bola. Since a definite parabola corresponds to each value of e/m, we
can easily, from the positions of the individual parabolas, determine
by measurement the specific charges of the ions contained in the ray,
and accordingly their masses also (since we know their charge, which
of course is an integral multiple of the elementary charge).
Fig. 7.- Diagrammatic representation of Aston's
mass-spectrograph.
The positive ray is deflected,
first downwards in an electric field (between the
condenser plates P, and P.), and then upwards
in a magnetic field (indicated by the coil M). By
----
suitable dimensioning and arrangement of the
P2
M
apparatus it can be secured (as was shown by Aston
nd Fowler) that positive ravs with the same elm but arbitrary velocity are focussed at one an‹
the same point P of the photographic plate.
I mass-spectrum is obtained on the photographi
plate; examples are shown in fig. 8, Plate I.
Aston's "mass-spectrograph" (for construction, see fig. 7; for
mass-spectra, fig. 8) enables us to determine the mass directly. It has
the immediate advantage over chemical methods, that the measure-
ment of mass is made on the individual ion, whereas chemists always
measure only the mean value of the mass over a very
large number of particles. We shall return to this
subject later (p. 37).
3. X-rays.
In the year 1895 Röntgen discovered a new kind
of ray, distinguished by a penetrating power up to
that time unknown. There are still many who remem-
ber what a sensation it made when the first photo-
graph of the bones of a living subject was published.
The hopes then aroused in the medical profession have
been to a large extent fulfilled. But in physics also
new paths were opened up by this discovery. The ray-
physics characteristic of the present day had begun.
Fig. 9.—Diugrammatic representation of an X-ray tube. C, cathode; A
anode (anticathode); E, battery for heating the cathode.
X-rays are produced when a cathode ray impinges on the glass
wall of the tube, or on a specially fitted anticathode (fig. 9).
Their
penetrating power, also called their hardness, increases as the poten-
tial exciting the tube is raised. But different substances show different
degrees of transparency. The higher the atomic weight, the greater
the opacity- hence the possibility of obtaining radiographs of the
bones, which contain a much greater proportion of metallic atoms
than the surrounding flesh. The question, whether the rays are of


===== PDF PAGE 0044 =====

3°
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
corpuscular nature, or waves similar to light, occupied physicists
in vain for a long time. Interference and difiraction experiments
(Walter and Pobl, 1908), the meaning of which we shall explain later
(8 1, p. 66), gave only one certain result, viz. that, if the rays are
waves, their wave-length must be considerably shorter than that of
visible or of ultraviolet light (the latter as shown photographically).
By using a crystal as the difiracting apparatus, von Laue and his co-
workers Friedrich and Knipping (1912) succeeded in deciding the ques-
tion (p. 68): X-rays are light of very short wave-length. Properly
speaking, therefore, they fall outside our present subject, which is the
investigation of the elementary constituents of matter.
But we shall
often have to refer to them as powerful aids to the investigation of
matter. It is very remarkable that by means of these very X-rays
experiments have been carried out the results of which are completely
opposed to the wave view, and have compelled us to interpret light
in terms of corpuscles (§ 5, p. 77).
4. Radiations from Radioactive Substances.
We have hitherto been occupied only with radiations produced
artificially. As we know, there are also natural radiations, which are
emitted by radioactive substances, the process involving spontaneous
change of the atoms of these substances into other atoms (Becquerol,
1896; P. and M. Curie, 1898; Rutherford, Soddy, 1902). We distinguish
three different kinds of radioactive radiations:
I. a-rays: The deflection experiments show that in these we
have to do with positively charged particles, which are much more
difficult to deflect than cathode rays, and must therefore be of much
greater mass than electrons. Their e/m ratio corresponds to that of a
doubly ionized helium ion, i.e. to a Hett particle. That it is actually
Hett (atomic weight 4) which is in question, and not, say, a singly
charged particle of atomic weight 2, which would of course show the
same value for the specific charge, is made very probable by the fact
(Rutherford, Ramsay and Soddy, 1903) that radioactive substances
develop helium, and has been proved in most convincing fashion in
an experiment due to Rutherford and Royds (1909), who succeeded in
capturing a-particles in an evacuated vessel; when the gas composed
of a-particles is made luminous, the spectroscope reveals unmistakably
the lines of helium.
2. B-rays: These, as deflection experiments show, undoubtedly
consist of electrons, and differ from the cathode rays only by their
higher velocity. While cathode rays can be produced with velocities


===== PDF PAGE 0045 =====

Il] RADIATIONS FROM RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
3I
within a few hundredth parts of that of light, the velocity of B-rays
difiers from that of light by a few thousandth parts only.
More exact investigation has shown that two kinds of B-rays are
emitted from a given radioactive element. One kind has a continuous
"velocity spectrum "
, i.e. electrons occur with every possible velocity
over an extensive range. The other kind has a discontinuous velocity
spectrum, i.e. it consists of groups of electrons of definite velocity.
We shall see later that the latter sort can be regarded as a secon-
dary effect of slighter importance; they do not originate at all in
the nucleus, which is characteristic of the atom (p. 53), but in the
external electronic system surrounding the nucleus.
The nuclear
p-rays proper, which have a continuous spectrum, present the theoretical
physicist with a puzzling problem. For if particles of all possible
energies actually leave the nucleus of the atom, the nucleus cannot
remain as a unique structure of definite energy. But all experiments
bear evidence that the product of the explosion process-the new
atomic nucleus, poorer by an electron—is well-defined and unique
and has therefore a definite energy. What happens then to the re-
mainder of the energy? A direct proof of its survival (say as y-rays)
has not been found; we are faced here with a difficulty of principle
(see p. 58).
3. f-rays: These are found to be incapable of deflection in the
electric or magnetic field. We have to do here with radiation of ex-
tremely short wave-length (ultra-X-radiation).
The fundamental law of radioactive transformation (v. Schweidler,
1905) states that the number of atoms disintegrating per unit time
(-IN/dt) is proportional to the number of atoms (N) present at the
moment;
_dN = ANdt.
The factor of proportionality & is called the radioactive decay constant;
it is characteristic of the kind of atom. By integration we find
N=Nge-",
where No denotes the number of atoms at the time t = 0. We can
express & in terms of the half-value period T, i.e. the time it takes
for half of the atoms to be disintegrated.
We have Noe -1T = ½No,
loge 2
0•6931
or
T =
=
For radium itself, T = 1590 years; but there are radioactive elements


===== PDF PAGE 0046 =====

32
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
with extremely long half-value periods, as thorium with I = 1•8 x 1010
years, and some with extremely short ones, like thorium B' with
T = 10-9 sec.
The meaning of the law of transformation is, that every atom in
a certain measure has the same explosion probability; clearly the
law is a purely statistical one. This has been confirmed in two diflerent
ways. First, it has been found quite impossible by ordinary physical
means (say high temperatures) to accelerate or retard the process of
disintegration, or to affect it in any way. Secondly, it has been found
possible to determine not only the mean number of particles emitted
per second, but also the fluctuations about the mean; and it turns
out that these obey the regular statistical laws (Appendix IV, p. 266).
Radioactive disintegration is the prototype of an elementary process,
which the ideas of classical physics are powerless to explain, but with
which modern quantum theory is quite capable of dealing.
We shall now cite a few more experiments, which seem to point
unambiguously to the corpuscular nature of the a- and B-rays. We
attach special weight to the fact that it seems simply impossible to
understand these experiments from any other point of view than that
we are actually dealing with discrete particles. In the next chapter,
however, we shall discuss a series of experiments on these same rays
which seem to indicate just as indubitably that the rays represent i
wave process.
We begin with scintillation phenomena (Crookes, 1903), which have
already been referred to at the end of the last chapter in connexion with
methods of determining Avogadro's number. If a fluorescent sereen is
set up near a radioactive preparation, flashes of light are observed, now
here, now there, on the material of the screen. Anyone who has a watch
with a " self-luminous" dial can, with the help of a magnifying glass,
convince himself of the presence of these flashes of light; the illumi-
nating substance consists of a layer of radioactive material, varnished
with zine blende. When the radiation strikes the zine blende, the spot,
is lit up. These phenomena compel us to assume that the a-radiation
consists of discrete particles, like a hail of shot, and that the fluorescent
screen becomes illuminated wherever it is struck by such a particle.
A second vivid proof of the corpuscular nature of these rays is given
by another method of counting the individual particles. The Geiger
counter (1913; Geiger and Müller, 1928) consists essentially of a metal
plate, placed opposite a metallic point (fig. 10); the whole is contained
in an air-filled vessel. A potential difference is applied to the plate and
point, as great as possible subject to the condition that in spite of the


===== PDF PAGE 0047 =====

II] RADIATIONS FROM RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
33
action of the point no discharge passes. If an a-particle now flies past,
it will ionize the molecules of air which it strikes, and this minute
alteration in the distri-
bution of the field just
Mica
suffices to produce a
Shutter
discharge between plate
x-Rays
String Electrometer
and point. After
this
wwww.w.
discharge, the plate and
Resistance R
point
again become
charged, and the pro-
Earth
•cess
begins afresh.
Every particle which
fies past causes in this
the point and the wall of the instrument.
way a momentary dis-
the curent and the diren off he dischae gene dish aimit
The discharges
charge which can be
are counted, e.g., by means of a recording arrangement (ampli
ier and telephone) inductively connected to the circuit; or
recorded by suitable
as in the figure, by the throws of a string electrometer.
apparatus, or, with the
help of an amplifier, heard in a telephone.
For proving the corpuscular nature of the radiations from radioactive
bodies, the most picturesque method consists in making the individual
particles directly visible
Movable Piston
in the Wilson cloud
Expansion Space
chamber (1912) (fig. 11).
If we take pure water
vapour in which there
are no nuclei on which
- Hollow Cylinder (Wood)
condensation could take
place, in the form of
dust particles and so on,
and if by sudden erpan-
Vacuum Chamber
sion we cool it suf-
Valve c
ficiently for the vapour
pressure of the water
to atmosphere
to pump
to manometer
to be exceeded, then in
Fig. n.-Diagrammatie representation of the Wilson
the absence of nuclei
cloud chamber.
The movable piston is suddenly lowered by
of condensation the
oponing the valved and so connecting the vacuum chamber
i with the part of the apparatus beneath the piston.
vapour cannot condense
into drops; we obtain supersaturated water vapour. If an «-particle
shoots into the gas in this condition, it will conize the molecules with
which it collides. But the ions now art as nuclei of condensation, on
which the neighbouring molecules of the supersaturated vapour are


===== PDF PAGE 0048 =====

34
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
deposited as droplets. The path of the a-particle is thus made visible in
the form of a series of minute water drops. An ingenious arrangement
makes it possible by a single operation to expand the vapour beyond
saturation point, to give the radioactive rays free access to the vapour, to
expose the whole apparatus to a flash of light, and to take an instan-
taneous photograph.
The plate shows a series of rectilinear or broken
paths. The paths of the a-particles can be distinguished from those of the
B-particles by the greater ionizing action of the former (more intense
condensation), and also by their greater penetrating power corre-
sponding to their greater mass (the paths thicker, straighter, less
broken). By collecting a sufficient amount of photographic material,
we can make statistical statements about the mean length of the
paths, the size of the breaks, &c.
5. Prout's Hypothesis, Isotopy, the Proton.
Now that we have sufficiently convinced ourselves of the corpus-
cular character of the a- and B-rays from a radioactive substance, we
proceed to consider the question which was raised at the outset,
concerning the building up of atoms and molecules from elementary
constituents.
So far back as the beginning of last century the
hypothesis was advanced by Prout that all atoms are ultimately made
up of hydrogen atoms. It fell into oblivion, however, when chemists
became able to determine the atomic weights of the elements more
exactly. If Prout's hypothesis were correct, the atomic weight of
every atom would of course be a whole number of times that of the
hydrogen atom. It is found, however, that for a whole series of atoms
this is not the case; a glaring example is chlorine, the atomic weight
of which, referred to that of hydrogen as unity, has the value 35-5.
The phenomena accompanying radioactivity were responsible for
the conjecture that elements, though chemically absolutely pure,
actually represent a mixture of different kinds of atoms, of the same
structure indeed, but of different mass. These atoms, perfectly equiva-
lent chemically, but of different mass, are called isotopes. To make
what follows more easily understood, we should like briefly to remind
the reader of the periodic system of the elements (Table I, p. 35). The
chemical behaviour of a given element is to a large extent determined by
the place which it occupies in the periodic table; thus the alkali metals,
with their chemically similar behaviour, occupy the same vertical
column, likewise the alkaline earths, the noble metals, the heavy metals,
and finally the halogens and the inert or noble gases.
The arrange-
ment of the elements in this system was originally carried out on the


===== PDF PAGE 0049 =====

PLATE II
Ch. IT, Fig. It—" Showers" of clectrons
and positrons liberated by cosmie rays
(From Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 139, Plate 22.)
Ch. 11, lie 12.
Dog-million volt position piss-
ing through a o-mm. lead plate and emerging its a
23-million volt positron.
(Handbuck der Posil, Julius Springer.
Macing po it


===== PDF PAGE 0050 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0051 =====

ISOTOPY, THE PROTON
2 He
4.002
10 Ne
20-183
18 A <
39•914
36 Kr
83-7
54 Xe
131•3
222
86 Rn
58•69
78 Pt
195-23
VIII
26 Fe 27 Co < → 28 Ni
102•91 106•7
58-91
41 Ru 15 Rh 46 Pd
193-1
76 Os 77 Ir
55•84
101•7
191•5
9 F
17 Cl
35•457
35 Br
79.916
53 I
126•92
85 -
• 19.000
61 Gd
157-3
71 Lu
175•0
VII
25 Mn
51•93
43 Ma
75 Re
186•31
63 Eu
152•0
TO Yb
173•04
80
16 S
16•0000
32.06
34 Se
78•96
52 Te
127-61
81 Po
(210-0)
VI
24 Cr
52•01
42 Mo
74 W
184•0
92 U
238•14
62 Sm
150•43
69 Tm
96•0
169•4
TN
14•008
15 P
31•02
33 As
74-91
51 Sb
121-76
83 Bi
209.00
The numbers in front of the symbols of the elements denote the atomic numbers; the numbers underneath are the atomic weights. The
THE RARE EARTHS (to be inserted between 57 La and 72 Hf)
61 —
68 Er
167-64
latter are taken, with a fer modifications, from the Report of the International Commission on Atomic Weights for 1932. The double
TABLE I.-PERIODIC TABLE OF THE ELEMENTS
23 V
50•95
41 Cb
93•3
73 Ta
181•1
191 Pa
(231)
6 C
60 Nd
111-27
67 Ho
12.00
14 Si
28•06
32 Ge
72•60
50 Sn
82 Pb
163•5
118•70
207-22
arrow ‹ > indicates the places where the order of atomic weights and that of atomic numbers do not agree.
IV
90 Th <
22 Ti
47•90
40 Zr
91•22
72 Hf
178•6
232•12
59 Pr
140•92
66 Dy
162•46
5B
10-82
13 Al
26•97
31 Ga
69•72
19 In
117-76
81 Tl
201•39
III
58 Ce
140•13
65 Tb
159-2
21 Sc
15•10
39 X
88.92
57 La
138•92
89 Ac
(227)
30 Zn
65•38
18 Cd
112•41.
80 Hg
200•61
II
# Be
9.02
12 Mg
27-32
20 Ca
10.08
38 Sr
87•63
56 Ba
137•36
88 Ra
225•97
29 Cu
63•57
17 Ag
79 Au!
107•880
197-2
I H
1•0078
3 Li
6•940
11 Na
22.997
39-096
37 Rb
85•11
55 Cs
132•91
87-
>19 K


===== PDF PAGE 0052 =====

36
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[Снар.
basis of their atomic weight; to-day we arrange them according to
their " atomic number"
, as we shall see below.
At the end of the periodic system stand the radioactive elements;
these too can be arranged according to their chemical behaviour.
The method, first applied by the Curies, for separating them and
determining their chemical properties, consists in bringing the radio-
active substance with other bodies into solution, and applying various
precipitating agents. It is then tested whether the activity, recog-
nizable by the radiating power, is in the precipitate or in the residual
solution, or is divided between the two. Each portion is treated in a
similar way, until one part of the products is free from radiation, and
the other part shows an exponential decay with characteristic half-value
period (§ 1, p. 31). Radium itself was isolated thus by the Curies (1898),
starting from the mineral pitchblende; barium was left along with the
radium to begin with, and could not be separated from it until the
end. Radium therefore belongs to the group of alkaline carth metals,
and so must be placed in the periodic table in the column under calcium
and barium; radon Rn (or Ra emanation), on the other hand, behaves
like a noble gas and so ranges under He, Ne, &c. The short-lived
succeeding disintegration product RaA (T = 3 min.) is found to be
chemically analogous to tellurium; the next, RaB (I = 27 min.),
goes with lead, and so on.
From these and similar results the following important law of radio-
active transformation has been deduced: emission of an a-particle (loss
of charge +2e) shifts the residual atom two places to the left in the
periodic table, ie. in the direction towards lower H-valencies; thus
radium on giving up an a-particle is transformed into radon (Ra
emanation). On the other hand, escape of a B-particle (loss of charge
—e) displaces the atom one place to the right (Russel, Soddy, Fajans,
1913). If we go through the three radioactive series according to this
rule (fig. 13), we find that many places in the table are multiply orcu-
pied. To cite a particularly conspicuous example: into the place in
the periodic table occupied by ordinary lead, there also come, according
to the law of radioactive change, the end-products of the three radio-
active series, viz. RaG, AcD and ThD, all three of which have un-
doubtedly the character of lead. Besides these, RaD, AcB, ThB and
RaB also fall into the place mentioned. All these elements, in spite of
their like chemical behaviour, have different masses, because in an
a-emission the atom gives up the mass 4 of helium, while in a B-disin-
tegration, on account of the small mass of the electron, the mass of the
a tom remains practically unchanged. The three elements of the radium


===== PDF PAGE 0053 =====

II]
ISOTOPY, THE PROTON
37
series mentioned above, RaB, RaD and RaG, must therefore have
masses decreasing successively by 4.
Uranium- Radium Series
-240
Z=92 (uk
Actinium Series
- 238
92
Thorium Series
92 Acll
90 0
UX,
90
18) 90
Ms The
RaTh
- 230
Ra Ac
-©90
(a) 88
89 A
- 228 y
090
MSTh,
- 226 €
ACXO 88
ThX ©88
- 224 S
Ra EmO 86
- 222 g
N6C086
ThEm 86
- 220 €
- 218
Ran084
- 216
RaC
RaC
RaBO
ACA 0 84
82
83
83
84
ThC
ThC
- 214
AcC
RaE
Raf
Act"
81
084
Асво
ThBO
83 P
84
82
82
- 212
— 210
RaC
RaD
ACD
82
Thro
ThD
- 208
82
RaG
81
81
82
- 206
82
-204
Fig. 13.- The radioactive transformation series.
C'he changes indicated by vertical lines co
spond to a-emission, by horizontal lines to B-emission: in the former the atomic weight fal
by 4, the atomic number by 2; in the latter the atomic weight remains approximately constant,
and the atomic number increases by 1. Shaded circles indicate a-rays; circles without shading, ß-rays.
The size of each circle corresponds to the half-value period.
It may also happen, we may add (eg. in every B-disintegration),
that two chemically different elements have the same atomic weight;
these are called isobars.
After the existence of isotopes had been demonstrated in this way
for radioactive substances, J. J. Thomson (1913), by deflection experi-
ments on canal rays, succeeded in proving that isotopes occur even
among ordinary elements, for instance neon. Ordinary chlorine, whose
atomic weight is given by chemistis as 355, consists of one kind of
chlorine of weight 35•0, and another of weight 37•0. Thomson's in-
vestigations reached their highest development in the mass-spectro-
graph constructed by Aston (1919), which we have already mentioned
(§ 2, p. 29), and which at present represents the most exact method
for the determination of atomic weights (Aston, Dempster (1918),
Bainbridge).
By magnetic separation of canal rays of lithium, it has even been
found possible (Oliphanti, Shire and Crowther, 1931) to obtain visibly
separated deposits of the two lithium isotopes (6 and 7), which can be
employed for other experiments.
Recently (1933) G. Hertz has succeeded in separating isotopes by a
(E 908)


===== PDF PAGE 0054 =====

38
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
mechanical method. By means of a suitably devised circulation pro-
cess, he caused the mixture of isotopes to diffuse several times through
a system of clay cylinders. Since the lighter components of the mix-
ture diffuse more rapidly than the heavier, we obtain in this way, as
the final products of the circulation process, two mixtures, one of
which is richer in the lighter components, the other in the heavier.
This method has been applied successfully for the separation of the
heavy isotope of hydrogen, of which we have to speak later (§ 5, p. 59).
The result of the detailed investigations on the occurrence of isotopes
may be stated in the following form. Every element (in the chemical
sense) has either a whole number for its atomic weight, or consists of
a mixture of different kinds of atoms whose atomic weights are whole
numbers. For practical reasons atomic weights have all along been
referred, not to hydrogen equal to 1, but to oxygen equal to 16. This
has proved fortunate as an aid to clearness, for the integral character
of the isotopic weights stands out much more obviously than with the
choice of H = 1. Hydrogen indeed, for 0 = 16, gets a value
(H = 1•0081) differing decidedly from 1, but the atomie weights of all
other pure isotopes approximate closely to whole numbers.
To understand how this comes about, we must anticipate so far
as to note that the masses of atoms are almost entirely concentrited
in the atomic nuclei. Every atom consists of a nucleus, which is sur-
rounded by a cloud of electrons (§ 3, p. 51). This nucleus is the essential
part of the atom. The result of Aston's investigations must be referred
to the nucleus: every nucleus consists of a whole number of hydrogen
nuclei or protons; its mass (except for trifling divergencies) is an
integral multiple of the mass of the proton.
These divergencies, which in spite of their slightness are of the
highest importance, will be discussed later (§ 4, p. 55).
Here we may once again summarize the ideas which for something
like two decades dominated physics.
There are two primitive atoms, the atoms of electricity, the negu-
tive electron and the positive proton; they have equal and opposite
charges, but (very remarkably) quite different masses (in the ritio
1:1840; see § 1, p. 27). From these all matter is built up, and that,
as we shall explain more fully in next chapter, in two stages: there
is first formed, from protons with some cementing electrons, the very
small and compact nucleus; then this is surrounded by a cloud of
electrons of relatively loose structure.
But this simple and homogeneous picture has, in the light of a series
of new discoveries, turned out to be incorrect, as we must now explain.


===== PDF PAGE 0055 =====

II]
ISOTOPY, THE PROTON
39
TABLE II.-TABLE OF ISOTOPES
Element
Isotopes
Element
Isotopes
H
1, 2, 3
50
120, 118, 116, 119, 111
124, 122, 112, 111, 111
Li
51
52
13h 72 12, 126, 128,
53
1127
54
129, 132, 131, 134, 136,
130, 128, 124, 126
55
33
21
56
138
135, 136, 137, 134,
132, 130
24,
26
57
27
58
140, 142, 138, 136
29, 30
59
60
146, 144, 142,
32
34,
33
62
148, 149, 150,
37
162, 164
40,
63
161, 163
64
155, 156, 157, 158, 160
40
44
43
65
-
59
636
67
161, 162, 163, 164
50, 46, 47, 49
68
166, 167, 168, 170
53, 50, 54
669)
169
70
56
71
17%, 172, 173, 174, 176
59
72
58
73
174, 178, 180, 177, 179
6:3
60, 62, 61, 64
74
181, 186, 182, 1833
titi, tis, 17, 70
75
187,185
71
76
102, 190, 189, 188, 186, 187
72, 70, 73, 76
77
193
, 191
7$
196, 195, 194, 192, 198
78
76, 82, 77, 77
79
197
79, 81
$0
202, 200, 199, 201, 198,
36
81, 86, 82, 83, 80, 78
204, 196
85,87*
$1
206,
20:3,
207*,
20S*,
88, 86, 87
210*
30
89
82
208, 206, 207, 201,
10
00, 14, 02, 06, 01
2002,
20007 2107, 211,
41
93
212*. 211*
Mo
42
98, 06, 90, 92,
D1, 100,
Bi
83
209,
210*, 211*, 212*,
97
214*
Ru
14
1S3, IN!
101, 104,
100, 19,
Po
$.1
210*
211*, 212*
212*
21•1**,
216*, 219*
Rh
45
103
Rn
$6
222*
210*,
220*
Pd
46
102004, 105, 1os, 10%,
Ri
$8
226*
223*, 224*, 229*
227*
, 225*
Ag
17
107, 109
232*
2278, 224*, 230*,
Cd
48
114, 112,
110, 113, 111,
2:3-4:M
116, 106, 108
2:31*
, 231*
In
19
115, 113
02
238*, 235*, 231*


===== PDF PAGE 0056 =====

40
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
[CHAP.
6. The Neutron.
The helium nucleus of mass 4 and charge 2 will, according to the
ideas just developed, consist of 4 protons and 2 olectrons; and simi-
larly in higher nuclei some electrons will partly compensate the sum
of the proton charges. The question now arises: why is there always
a surplus positive charge? May not a nucleus exist with equal numbers
of protons and electrons, e.g., as the simplest form, a neutron, con-
sisting of a proton and an electron?
Reflections of this sort have been dwelt upon by many writers,
in the course of speculations on the nature of the nucleus and of radio-
active disintegration. The actual discovery of neutrons was due to
purely experimental results, referring in fact to artificial transformations
of atoms. Thus it was observed by Bothe and Becker (1930), when light
elements like lithium and beryllium were bombarded by a-rays, that
y-rays were emitted. Then Irène Curie, daughter of the discoverers of
radium, and her husband Joliot found (1932) that the radiation from the
bombarded beryllium, when passed through substances containing hydro-
gen, such as paraffin, expelled protons, which y-rays never do; anew kind
of radiation must therefore also be present. From an investigation with
an ionisation chamber it was inferred by Chadwick (1932) that the new
radiation consists of uncharged, heavy particles. This wits confirmed by
Feather (1932) with help of the Wilson Chamber. The track of the
particle coming from the beryllium remains invisible, showing that
it does not ionize the molecules of air, while of course we see the
tracks of the nuclei on which it impinges. By comparison of the ion-
isation in nitrogen and hydrogen, Chadwick was able to estimate the
mass of the neutron, finding it approximately oqual to that of a proton.
With regard to their penetrating power, neutrons behave quite
differently from any other kind of radiation, whether light waves or
charged particles. With the latter, the process of absorption essentially
consists in their giving up energy to the outer electrons of the atoms;
as the number of these runs roughly parallel with the mass, so also
the absorbing power of different substances runs roughly parallel
with their mass. The neutrons, however, pay no attention whatever
to the outer electrons— only collisions with a nucleus stop them; since
the size of the nucleus varies very little from one substance to another
(p. 183), it is the number of nuclei per unit volume which now
counts.
But 1 gm. of hydrogen contains the same number of nuclei
as 16 gm. of oxygen; the absorbing power per grumme is therefore
some 16 times as great for hydrogen as for oxygen. The Wilson photo-


===== PDF PAGE 0057 =====

II]
THE NEUTRON
4I
graphs show, moreover, that in some collisions of neutrons and nuclei
the neutron flies on (it is supposed that its diameter is of the same
order of magnitude as that of a nucleus), while in others it is captured
by the nucleus, and causes this to explode, with expulsion of other
particles (§ 6, p. 61). We thus come to the question of what part the
neutrons take in the structure of nuclei; we shall deal with this later
(p. 57), and only remark here that of course it is now possible
to regard all nuclei, of whatever (positive) charge, as made up of
protons and neutrons alone, without making any use of electrons.
The electron would then only have a place in the nucleus as a
constituent of the neutron. But the question whether even this sup-
position is valid, viz. that the neutron = proton + electron, is by no
means easy to answer. For meanwhile the position has become further
complicated by the discovery of the positive electron, or positron,
of which we shall speak presently. It would now even be possible to
regard the neutron and positron, along with the electron, as the
elementary constituents of matter, and to put the proton equal to
neutron + positron. The question—if it has a meaning at all—is one
of stability, ie. of energy balance; for energy is required to separate
two particles, and we can therefore decide the question by careful
energy measurements; we shall return to this later (Chap. III, § 1, p. 55).
7. Cosmic Rays.
Positrons.
There is no question which has presented (and still presents) greater
difficulties to theorctical physicists than the difterence in the masses
of the positive and negative atoms of electricity. Every theory pro-
posed up to the present is symmetrical in the sign of the charge. It
would therefore long ago have been reasonable to conjecture that
there are also particles of both kinds, heavy and light, with opposite
charges to those known: positive electrons and negative protons.
To advance this as a proposition was reserved, however, for the latest
form of quantum mechanies (1928); the existence of positive electrons
and the conditions for their occurrence and disappearance follow from
Dirac's relativistic wave mechanics of the electron (§ 8, p. 169).
The actual discovery of positive electrons or "positrons" was
achieved independently of this, in connexion with observations on the
so-called "cosmic ray»"
'. These are of great interest for their own
sake, so something may be said here about their discovery and inves-
tigation.
As has already been mentioned (§ 1, p. 24), gases in their natural state
are poor conductors of electricity. But they cun be made conducting in


===== PDF PAGE 0058 =====

42
ELEMENTARY PARTICLES
various ways, not only, as explained above, by applying potentials at
reduced pressure, but also by irradiation with all kinds of corpuscular
rays or (short-wave) electromagnetic rays. These rays separate electrons
from the atoms or molecules. These electrons, as well as the residues,
the ions, are set in motion by an electric field. To demonstrate the
presence of radiations, and investigate their properties, ionization
chambers- small, gas-filled vessels, with electrodes-are used. In
measuring the strength of the radiation by the ionic current, we must
be certain that this current vanishes when there is no radiation. It is
found, however, that the current is never completely absent. The re-
sidual ionization had been attributed to a weak terrestrial radioactive
radiation. Thick lead shielding, however, does not suppress it entirely;
a weak ionization always remains (Rutherford, McLennan, 1903), Which
must arise from a radiation of much higher penetrating power than
any known y-rays. It was observed by Gockel (1909) that this radiation
did not diminish when the apparatus was taken to a height above the
ground, in the way it ought to do if it originated in radioactive sources
in the earth. Hess then (1912) showed by balloon ascents at heights up
to 5 km. that the intensity of the radiation even increases with height;
he found also that it is just as great by night as by day (and so cannot
come from the sun). The rays appear therefore to come from interstellar
space; they are called cosmic rays. The experiments were carried to
greater and greater heights by Kohlhörster (1914), later by Millikan,
Tizzard, and Regener; with recording balloons Regener (1935) reached
as high as 30 km. The existence of the rays was also demonstrated at
the • bottom of deep lakes, up to 500 metres under water (Milikan,
Regener, 1928).
More exact researches were carried out with the help of the Wilson
cloud chamber (first by Skobelzyn, 1929) and a large magnetic lickl;
the tracks of the particles were seen as circles of slight curvature; their
velocity or energy was deduced by measurement of the radius. It was
thus found that the rays consist of extremely swift particles; among
them it is no rarity to find electrons with velocities to produce which
would require a potential of 100 or 1000 million volts.
What we observe here at the earth's surface is certainly not the
original cosmic radiation, but a mixture of that with secondary radia-
tion, consisting of electrons ejected from air molecules, or appearing
in the process of pair production referred to below. Some light appears
to be thrown on the question of the nature of the primary radiation by
the fact that its intensity depends on the geographical latitude (Clay);
it is weaker at the equator than at the poles. It must therefore be


===== PDF PAGE 0059 =====

II]
COSMIC RAYS: POSITRONS
43
a case of electrically charged particles, which are deflected in the
magnetic field of the earth; for a swarm of electrons, which strikes
a magnet, concentrates chiefly round the poles a fact which of
course has long been known, from the explanation of the aurora by
Störmer (since 1903). The cosmic rays seem to come pretty uniformly
from all parts of the sky. It is too carly to speculate on their origin.
Anderson was the first to remark that frequently two kinds of track
appeared on a photograph, which were of opposite curvature, though
otherwise both looked like electron tracks (fig. 14, Plate II). If then we
do not believe in positive electrons, we must assume that the one track
is traversed in the opposite sense from the other. This possibility was
excluded as follows. A lead plate was set up in the chamber, and tracks
were found due to particles which had passed through the plate. But
such a particle must necessarily have a smaller velocity, and therefore
a greater curvature of path, after it has passed through than before;
so that the sense in which the tracks are described can be determined
(fig. 12, Plate II). The existence of positrons was thus proved. Blackett
and Occhialini (1933) found that frequently a whole shower of par-
ticles is ejected from the wall of the vessel, their tracks showing, some
positive, some negative curvature. Since we must attribute their com-
mon origin to an atomic explosion, we have here new evidence for positive
electrons. Recently their occurrence has been demonstrated in various
processes of nuclear disintegration; we shall return to this later (§ 6,
p. 61). It has been found further, that the primary cosmic radiation
consists predominatingly of positive particles, presumably positrons;
this is inferred from the fact that in equatorial latitudes on the earth
more rays come from the west than from the cast.
From the theoretical point of view the discovery of the positron
is of the highest importance; for it confirms the theory of Dirac already
mentioned, which on the intuitional side amounts to this, that neither
electrons nor positrons are immutable elementary particles, but that by
coming into collision they may annihilate each other, with the emission
of energy in the form of light waves; and conversely, that a light
wave of high energy can in certain circumstances become the source
of a "
pair" (electron I positron). There is experimental evidence
for both processes. The fact that in our actual world negative electrons
preponderate, is not inconsistent with the theory.


===== PDF PAGE 0060 =====

CHAPTER III
The Nuclear Atom
1. Lorentz's Electron Theory.
The method of physical science in the investigation of the struc-
ture of matter has in all times been based on the following principle:
laws established for "macroscopic bodies "
, ie. bodies of ordinary
size, are applied tentatively to elementary particles; if some disagree-
ment is then found, an alteration of the laws is taken in hand. In
this way, advance essentially depends upon the closest co-operation of
observation and theoretical interpretation.
Thus in the preceding pages we have made continual use of the
laws of interaction of charged particles, and of their response to the
influence of external fields and light rays. The most important result,
that the mass of an atom is almost wholly concentrated in a very
small nucleus, while its volume, and its physical and chemical proper-
ties, are determined by a comparatively loose surrounding structure
of electrons, we have assumed without proof. This proof we must
now supply. First, however, we must look a little more deeply into the
laws of the electromagnetic field.
As we know, theseare formulated in Maxwell's equations (1855) (App.
VI, p. 272). As originally stated, these equations represent the changes
in space and time of the electric field strength E, and the magnetic H,
in material bodies, and therefore contain certain constants which are
characteristic of those bodies (in the simplest case they are the
dielectric constant and the magnetic permeability).
The atomic theory of electricity simplifies the field equations, by
considering only fields in a vacuum; the units can then be chosen so
that the field equations contain no material constants (or at mosti, the
velocity of light c = 3.1010 cm./sec., which is retained so that we may
be able to use the ordinary units of kinematics, centimetres and seconds).
This is the standpoint of Lorentz's electron theory (1897), which domi-
nated physics about the turn of the century. At that time we were


===== PDF PAGE 0061 =====

CAP. III]
LORENTZ'S ELECTRON THEORY
45
acquainted with free electrons and were aware that they are con-
stituents of atoms; about the positive atoms of electricity nothing
was known. The electrons were pictured as very small charged bodies,
which generated the field in free space, and conversely were acted on
by forces due to the field. These forces determined the motion of the
electrons in accordance with Newton's law: mass into acceleration
equals force. It was therefore necessary to ascribe to the electrons a
mass m besides their charge e, and we have seen that the fraction
e/m can be determined by deflection experiments. On the basis of these
assumptions the motion of electrons in various fields could be calcu-
lated; it was thus found that the size of the electron (its radius, if it
was pictured as a sphere) plays a part, and that for the following
reason. When there is acceleration, the field of the charges in the
electron is modified, and this changed field passes over the electronic
sphere with the velocity of light, and exercises forces on it. For
small accelerations, the forces to a first approximation are propor-
tional to the acceleration and to e?la, where e is the charge, and a
the radius (with a numerical factor which depends on the distribution
of the charge); in other words, the effect is the same as if the mass
were increased by a part proportional to eza (J. J. Thomson, 1882;
Heaviside, Searle, 1885). This fact suggested to some physicists
the idea that the electron possesses no "ordinary" mass at all, but
only " electromagnetic" mass; and the smallness of the mass of the
electron seemed to confirm this. Further, the electromagnetic mass
was found to depend on the velocity, and the first observations of this
efiect by Kaufmann (1906), were regarded as a brilliant triumph for
the theory. Hasenöhrl (1904) derived the laws of motion of an empty
box with reflecting walls filled with electromagnetic radiation, and
found that this radiation behaved as having a mass E/c, where E is
the total electromagnetic energy. This was the first indication of the
general law considered in the following section.
The calculations of the electromagnetic mass of the electron rested
on the assumption (Abraham, 1903) that the electron is rigid, retain-
ing its form throughout the motion; which implies the issumption
of infinitely great internal forces of non-electromagnetic origin. If the
assumption is dropped, we obtain not only other numerical factors,
but also other functions of the velocity. Besides, the assumption of
absolute rigidity is quite incompatible with the theory of relativity
(on account of the Lorentz contraction; see Appendix V, p. 269); if
instead of this we postulate invariability of form in the reference
system in which the electron is instantaneously at rest, we obtain a


===== PDF PAGE 0062 =====

46
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[Снар.
formula which agrees, to a numerical factor, with that stated on p. 27
(Lorentz's electron, 1909). The numerical factor, however, must to
a large extent remain arbitrary, since it depends on the distribution
of the charge, as to which we know nothing. Worse still, even in this
relativistic form very great internal forces of cohesion must be assumed,
to keep the parts of the electron together, these having charges of the
same sign and therefore repelling each other; and this leads to i con-
tradiction of a fundamental theorem of the mechanics of radiating
systems, of which we have now to speak.
2. The Theorem of the Inertia of Energy. Unitary Field Theory.
The theorem of the inertia of energy in its full generality was first
stated by Einstein (1905). It asserts that any energy E possisses a
mass m, in accordance with the equation E = mc. Of this relation
we shall later continually make use. The relation is very far from
being a mere theoretical subtlety; the phenomena connected with
it have as a matter of fact the character of large scale eflects.
Think of a closed box, in the sides of which are fitted two exactly
similar instruments (I and II), which are so constructed that they can
send out a momentary light signal in a definite
direction, or completely absorb an incoming light
signal (fig. 1). Now let the instrument I, at a
Fig. I.-Illustration of Einstein's ideal experiment to
prove
the relation E = mc".
The transmitter I radiates to the receiver II
a definite quantity of energy E; in consequence of this the whole
box undergoes a recoil.
definite moment, send out a light signal in the direction of the instru-
ment II. During this process of emission, the instrument 1, and with it
the whole box, experiences a recoil. The occurrence of this recoil is due
to the radiation pressure. The latter phenomenon was observed experi-
mentally by Lebedew (1901), in good agreement with theory; it was in-
vestigated later by Nichols and Hull (1903) and others, and finally very
exactly by Gerlach and his collaborators (1923). In consequence of the
recoil, during the whole time which the light takes to go from I to lI the
box will move in the opposite direction, and will not come to rest until
the light strikes the instrument II, and the radiation pressure on it again
brings the box to a standstill. Now interchange the two instruments;
this alters nothing, since of course the two were given the same mass.
Then let the instrument II send out towards I the sume quantity of
light as was sent before by I, whereby the whole box is again displaced
to the left the same distance as before. Now interchange the instru-


===== PDF PAGE 0063 =====

Ill] THEOREM OF THE INERTIA OF ENERGY
47
ments once more. By proceeding in this way, it would be possible to
displace the box any distance, without any change taking place in
the interior of the box or in its neighbourhood—a conclusion obviously
at variance with a fundamental property of the centre of inertia.
The contradiction disappears at once, however, if we take account
of Einstein's thesis of the equivalence of energy and mass. By the
emission of the light signal at the first step of our ideal experiment,
the first instrument gives out a definite quantity of energy E; its
content of energy, and accordingly its mass also, become smaller.
Similarly, the energy content, and therefore the mass, of the instru-
ment Il is increased on its absorption of the light signal, so that the
mass of II is now greater than that of I; to interchange I and II
without shifting the centre of inertia therefore requires that the whole
box should be displaced a definite distance to the right. If we examine
now what the relation between mass and energy must be, in order that
the displacement of the box, due to radiation pressure, should be
exactly compensated by interchanging the two instruments, a short
calculation (Appendix VII, p. 274) leads to Einstein's formula, as
quoted above. The most important field of application of Einstein's
law is the disintegration of nuclei; we shall see later (p. 62) that this
gives an experimental proof of it.
We return now to the problem of electromagnetic mass (p. 45).
According to Einstein's theorem. the simplest way of obtaining this
mass for small velocities should be, to calculate the internal electric
energy of the charge collected in the electron; this energy is in fact
proportional to ela, but the numerical factor is in all circumstances
difterent from the one we get by calculating the force of reaction of
the electron's own field. The contradiction, as we have already seen,
is due to the presence of forces of cohesion, which also should make
a contribution to the energy (though this is difficult to reconcile with
the postulated rigidity).
In consequence of these unsatisfactory results, the tempting idea of
electromagnetic mass has gradually been given up. It was found that
the theory of relativity suggested in a purely formal way a law of depen-
dence of mass on velocity for every body a law which has been bril-
liantly confirmed by experiment (Bucherer, 1909; Neumann-Schäfer,
1914; Guije-Ratnowski-Lavanchy, 1921).
As the quantum theory
developed, physicists became scoptical about definite models of the ele-
mentary particles. They preferred therefore to think of the electron, in
regard to all external actions, as a charged point mass, without troubling
further about its internal structure. But even this point of view has


===== PDF PAGE 0064 =====

48
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[CHAP.
its difficulties. In the first place it means, not a solution, but a shifting
of the problem. For the electron's proper energy, which is propor-
tional to ella, becomes infinite when a is put equal to 0. We must
therefore eliminate the energy from all physical laws, a procedure
which, under both classical methods and those of the quantum theory,
leads to very artificial constructions, which all contradict the theorem of
the inertia of energy; for the field energy even of a point charge is
of course, according to the Faraday-Maxwell view, by no means con-
centrated in the electron, but must be thought of as distributed through-
out space.
In the second place, the radius a of the electron has an actual
physical significance; by a we understand that length which satisfies
Einstein's relation a. e?/a = mc?, where a is a numerical factor of the
order of magnitude 1. We therefore have
e"
a=a.
, = a. 2•817 × 10-13 cm.
mc?
The simplest phenomenon in which this quantity occurs is the scatter-
ing of light (or other electromagnetic radiation) by atoms. According
to Maxwell's electromagnetic theory, light (as also X-rays) consists
of a periodically variable, electromagnetic alternating field. If the
light wave strikes a charged particle which can move frecly, the latter
is set vibrating, and that the more strongly, the lighter the particle is.
If the particle is bound to other particles, its induced oscillation will
have a greater amplitude the closer the frequency of the incident light
is to its proper frequency. Hence, on the one hand, electrons, on account
of their trifling mass, will vibrate in sympathy with the light much more
strongly than protons, say, or still heavier particles; on the other
hand, with visible light, to a very large extent only those particles
which occupy places near the surface of the atom, and are therefore
relatively loosely bound, will be excited to vibration; while for
excitation of the bound electrons farther inside tho atom, X-rays
will be needed.
Now, as we know, a vibrating charged particle acts like an antenna
—it sends out electromagnetic vibrations of its own in the form of
spherical waves; and, in fact, the energy drawn per unit time from
the primary ray and converted into scattered radiation by a (free or
loosely bound) electron is given (Appendix VIII, p. 275) by
e?
2
I = .
Io,
3
mc?)


===== PDF PAGE 0065 =====

III]
THEOREM OF THE INERTIA OF ENERGY
49
where I, is the intensity of the primary radiation. Since I, is defined
as energy per square centimetre, but I denotes the whole scattered
energy, the quotient I/I, must have the dimensions of an area.
We
can put it equal to an
"effective cross-section" of the electron ta?
and have then
I
-=
3 mớs)
= та?,
so that
a =
This quantity is the "radius" of the electron if a is put equal to
V (8/3).
The remarkable thing about this method is that it makes no use
of any hypothetical extrapolation of electrostatics to the interior of
the election, but works with a point electron.
Quantum theory calculations of the scattering of light at free
electrons, taking account of the theory of relativity (Klein-Nishina,
1929), also all lead to effective cross-sections, which depend on functions
of this radius a.
Exactly analogous results hold for the scattering of electrons at
nuclei (or other electrons), with which we shall deal in detail in the next
section (p. 53). Here we shall merely put the question: how near can
two electrons approach each other, if the velocity of each at a great
distance is v? Clearly the most favourable case is that in which they
move towards each other in the same straight line. In this case, at
the moment of closest approach, the velocity is zero, and therefore
also the kinetic energy; the energy is therefore the sum of the rest
energy 2m,c and the potential energy e. By the principle of the
conservation of energy, this must be equal to the original energy,
which by the theory of relativity is 2mo = 2moe?
11-
thus we
e?
2m,c+
whence
r =
- 1).
We see that here also the effective radius is proportional to e/mc'.
It might be held that the electronic radius here is a mere artificial
magnitude, obtainable by calculation from the constants e, m and c;


===== PDF PAGE 0066 =====

50
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[CHAP.
still, the newer developments show that all our theories appear to tail
at lengths of this order of magnitude. Surely then we must assume
that the radius of the electron has an actual meaning. The state of
affairs requires a modification of electrodynamics of such a sort that
the existence of the electronic radius becomes intelligible without
bringing in the mechanically defined mass m. Attempts in this direc-
tion have not been lacking; the works of Mie (1912) in particular deserve
special mention. The present writer (1933) has pointed out a way which
leads to the required end without going beyond the limits of classical
methods, and which can also be accommodated to the quantum theory.
The leading idea of this unitary theory of field and matter is, that
there is a natural unit for the field strengths E and H, an absolute
field strength b, which at the same time represents a sort of upper
limit for all fields (like the velocity of light c for velocities). Formally,
the new field equations are identical with those of Maxwell for an iso-
tropic medium with a dielectric constant e and a permeability p,
except that e and u are not constant, but functions of the field itself,
viz. (Appendix VI, p. 272).
1
1
p=.
1+
62
(E2 - E*);
their product is 1, as in Maxwell's equations for free space. It is then
found that (positive or negative) point charges exist (as singularities
of the field), but that the corresponding field energy does not become
infinite. From e and b we can calculate an "electronic radius" a by
the formula
a =6
the energy is then given by
E = 1•2361
with a numerical factor free from all arbitrariness. Such a charge
moves in external fields, which do not change to any extent within
distances of the order of magnitude of a, exactly like a Lorentzian
electron with purely electromagnetic mass; and Einstein's theorem
E= me?
is rigorously valid (Born and Infeld, 193). For short-waved fields
(wave-length of order a), however, deviations occur from the ordinary
laws of motion of the electron. Similar considerations can be applied


===== PDF PAGE 0067 =====

III]
THEOREM OF THE INERTIA OF ENERGY
in the quantum theory also. For every isolated clectrodynamic system
there exists a representative point which moves according to the laws
of the quantum mechanics of particles. The mass is of course taken as
equal to the energy, divided by c'. There exists a finite angular momen-
tum of the field the laws of motion of which are closely connected with
those of the spinning electron, of which we have to speak later (see § 1,
p. 136, and § 8, p. 169). The actual calculation of the smallest possible
masses, it is true, has not yet been eflected. Hence it is not yet settled
whether this theory means a forward step towards understanding the
elementary particles. In any case it abolishes the dualism of field and
particles in a manner free from contradictions.
3. Investigation of Atomic Structure by Scattering Experiments.
The most important method for investigating atomic structure
consists in causing radiation of some kind to fall on the atom, and
observing how this is altered by the atoms. The alteration consists
in a weakening (absorption) of the radiation which passes on unde-
flected, and the corresponding production of diffracted or scattered
radiation. The case of the scattering of light at a free or weakly bound
electron has already been considered (§ 2, p. 48). The process can be
used for the purpose of counting the loosely bound electrons in an
atom. If their number is n, and N is the number of atoms per unit
volume, then the energy lost by the primary radiation per centimetre
of its path, the absorption constant, is given (J. J. Thomson, 1906)
by
nNI
=
nN.
(mc= )
Since N is known from kinetic theory data, n can be determined from
absorption measurements on X-rays; by taking these sufficiently hard,
all the electrons, at least in the lighter atoms, can be regarded as prac-
tically free, so that n denotes the whole number of electrons, and so
also the nuclear charge in terms of the elementary charge as unit.
The measurements showed, for all lighter atoms which could be
investigated, that n is approximately equal to half the atomic weight.
Let it be remarked at once that to-day, by more refined observations
on light and X-rays, we can obtain far fuller enlightenment on atomic
structure. Thus we have in the first place the phenomenon of dis-
persion of the light passing through, which gives information on the
binding forces of the electrons; or again, the interference rings which
careful observations reveal in the scattered radiation from X-rays


===== PDF PAGE 0068 =====

52
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
(p. 68), and which supply data on the diameter of the electronic
envelope of the atom, and on the distance between the centres of the
atoms in molecules (Debye, 1929).
We pass now to the attempts to investigate atomic structure by
means of scattering experiments on beams of electrons. These were
first made by Lenard and his collaborators,
who used cathode rays. We have seen in
Electron
Chapter I that the diameter of an atom is
Fig. 2.-Passage of electrons through matter; according
to the conceptions of the kinetic theory of gases the molecules
are structures of size ~I A.; if they were impenetrable to an
electron, the latter could not push its way through thin foil.
of the order of magnitude 10- cm. If the atoms were massive spheres,
as in the scheme of fig. 2, then collisions with these spheres would neces-
sarily very soon stop a cathode ray particle completely. The syste-
matic investigations of Lenard, however, gave a precisely contrary
result. It was found, in fact, that atoms are almost perfectly trans-
parent to swift electrons. This suggested to Lenard (1903) the idea that
an atom consists of a very small impenetrable centre, which he called
a dynamid; this centre is surrounded by an electron cloud of loose
texture, offering scarcely any resistance to incident, cathode ruys. As
author of this hypothesis, Lenard may
Foil
properly be credited with the first sugges-
tion of the modern model of the atom.
Usually, however, the title of father
of the atomic theory is given to Kuther-
Fig. 3.-Arrangement for observing the scattering of
a-particles: a Geiger counter is used to count the number
of a-particles deflected from the primary direction through
a definite angle 0.
ford, who took up the research with more adequate instrumental
resources, and carried it farther; to him we owe our concrete,
quantitative ideas on atomic structure. For his experiments on
scattering Rutherford (1911) used, not, like Lenard, the relatively light
electron, but the much more massive a-particle (lig. 3). On account
of their greater mass, a-particles are not noticeably deflected by the
electrons in the atom, and therefore record only collisions with the
more massive particles. The comparative penetrating eftect of clec-
trons and a-particles may be illustrated roughly by the difierence
between a light rifle bullet and a heavy shell.
In the first place, Rutherford's experiments show definitely (1913)


===== PDF PAGE 0069 =====

III]
SCATTERING EXPERIMENTS
53
that an atom, except for a small massive nucleus, is almost perfectly
empty— a result which had already been found by Lenard. Since the
a-particles are perceptibly deflected by the nucleus only, we can deduce
the law of deflection from the law of distribution of the a-particles
which have been scattered by a piece
of foil. The definite result was found
that the effective deflecting force is the
Coulomb force 2Ze2/r2, where 2e, as we
Fig. 4.- Scattering of a-particles by a nucleus of +2€
charge Z; the paths of the a-particles are hyperbolas.
•Ze
know, is the charge of the a-particle, and Ze is the charge of the
nucleus. The paths of the a-particles are hyperbolas with the nucleus
as focus (fig. 1).
If the incident ray contains one a-particle per square centimetre,
then according to Rutherford (Appendix IX
., p. 276) the number of
particles per unit solid angle which sufter a deflection d is given by
w(ф) = Z=
M
(0/c)* sin 1$
(m = mass of electron, M = 1m, = mass of a-particle); here again
the effective cross-section of the electron occurs as a factor, but the
electronic radius e/mc' is multiplied by the small factor (characteristic
of the dimensions of the nucleus)
m
m
1
.. ==
M
1 × 1810 = 1-36 × 10-1.
The experiments showed that the number Z, which gives the
nuclear charge, is equal to the number which would be assigned to
the element in question in a consecutive enumeration of the elements
in the periodic system. If the atom is to be neutral, the number giving
the nuclear charge must agree with the number of electrons in the
electron cloud surrounding the nucleus, as determined by optical and
X-ray scattering experiments. The chemical behaviour of the atom
depends of course on the external electrons, so that it is not the mass
of the atom, but its atomic number (or number giving the nuclear
charge) which determines its chemical properties. Isotopes have the
same atomic number.
For collisions which are nearly central, i.e. for scattering through
wide angles, deviations occur from the distribution of the scattered
a-particles determined by Coulomb's law. From this we must infer
(E 908)
5


===== PDF PAGE 0070 =====

54
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[CHAP.
that Coulomb's law only holds down to distances of about 10-13 cm.
The nucleus also has a finite size; it is worthy of remark that the
"nuclear radius" is of the same order of magnitude as the radius of
the electron.
According to Rutherford, the nuclear atom may be described as
follows. In the centre of the atom there is the nucleus; this was thought
of as composed of n, protons and n- electrons, its charge being there-
fore equal to
Le = (n+-n_)e,
and its mass, apart from the mass defect to be discussed later (p. 55),
equal to n+ referred to H = 1. Possible isotopes must have the
same nuclear charge number Z, and can therefore only consist of
n.+ = x protons
and
n- I x electrons.
Since the discovery of the neutron and the positron, there are
clearly other possible, ways in which the nucleus may be thought of
as built up. Only one of these models, however, has been found feasible,
viz. a nucleus composed of p protons and n neutrons; the nuclear
charge number (atomic number) is then Z=p, the atomie mass
number is A = p +n. The considerations in favour of this model
will be presented immediately (§ 1, p. 57).
Round the nucleus, as has been mentioned, there move in the
neutral atom Zi electrons, which fill a sphere of radius ~ 10 $ cm.
To get an idea of the dimensions, and the emptiness, of an atom, take
the following illustration. If we imagine a drop of water to be ex-
panded to the size of the earth, and all the atoms in it also enlarged
in the same proportion, an atom will have a diameter of a few motres.
The diameter of the nucleus, however, will be only something like
1/100 mm., and this must also be the order of magnitude of the 2
electrons which fly round in the sphere corresponding to the atom.
It follows from these relations of magnitude that in the great
majority of physical and chemical processes the nuclei act simply as
positively charged point masses; only the external electronic system is
essential. Research has therefore been devoted to this first, with such
success indeed that we are to-day in possession of a theory which
seems to be in complete accord with experiment.
With this we shall
deal in detail later.
Nuclear physics, on the contrary, is still in its
initial stages. Experimental research, it is true, advances rapidly, but


===== PDF PAGE 0071 =====

PLATE III
Ch. H1, Fig. 6. Disintegration of a nitrogen nucleus by an «-particle.
A proton of very
long range is emitted. a-particles of to diflerent ranges are seen, omitted by a mixture of
thorium B and C. (From Proc. Koy. Sor. A, Vol. 136.)
E: 008
Facing D. 5.4


===== PDF PAGE 0072 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0073 =====

III]
SCATTERING EXPERIMENTS
55
theory does not as yet keep pace with it. And yet the problem of
investigating the structure of nuclei, and of reducing to simple principles
the typical laws and relations thereby brought to light, is without
doubt the central problem of all natural science. We must content
ourselves here with giving an account of the experimental methods
and results. Our present theoretical resources are capable of dealing
with only a few features of the case (§ 9, p. 176).
4. Mass Defect and Nuclear Binding Energy.
We have already mentioned that the mass of a nucleus is not an
exact multiple of the mass of the proton. This is really a matter of
course, for, in order to remove a proton, neutron or a-particle from the
nucleus of a higher element, we must supply energy (except in radio-
active substances, in which such disintegrations can occur spon-
taneously, i.e. without previous supply of energy). This loss of energy
when elementary particles become united to a nucleus is, however,
according to Einstein (1905), equivalent to a loss of mass, so that the
final product is lighter than the sum of the weights of the individual
components in the separated state. Take a numerical example. The
greatest deficit occurs in the formation of a helium atom from four
hydrogen atoms. The latter have the total mass 1 X 1-008, and in
the combined state (helium) the mass 4-001; the energy freed in tho
process of combination is therefore, by Einstein's formula,
E = (4 × 1•008 - 1-001)0°0-028 c3
= 0-25 X 1020 ergs/mole.
In order to split up a helium atom into four hydrogen atoms, at
least this amount of enorgy must be supplied. To make it easier to
grasp its order of magnitude, convert orgs into calories; we find the
value of E to be the enormous one of 6•4 X 108 kilocalories per mole.
For the sake of comparison, it may be noted that heats of combustion
are of the order of magnitude of a few hundred kilocalories per mole.
In nuclear physies it is customary to quote mass defects or binding
energies simply in atomic weight units, o.g. for He, E = 0028; or,
since they are small fractions of the unit, in multiples of the electronic
mass m (or the electronic energy me"), so that for He,
•E = 0•028 × 1810 mc° - 52 mc°.
We shall frequently make use of the unit me. It corresponds to a
kinetic energy of the clectron, requiring about 500,000 volts to pro-
duce; we say that it is equal to 5 X 105 electron volts (eV).


===== PDF PAGE 0074 =====

THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[CHAP.
The measurements of mass defects carried out with very great accu-
racy by Aston (since 1920) supply information, therefore, on the " heats
of formation " of nuclei, i.e. on the energy relations in nuclear construc-
tion. These are found to follow certain perfectly definite rules. It has
proved to be convenient to divide up the various nuclei into four groups,
E- 106 Erg
40 г
20
→ 72
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 28 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
50
52
-40
—60
- 80
— 100
- 120
- 140
- 160
- 180
- 200
- 220
- 240
. 0
XXO
- 260
о4п+2Туре
- 280
Д4П+1 Туре Х4п+3Туре
- 300(70 ° Erg)
Fig. 5.-Binding energies (mass defects) in ergs, plotted against n, where n is the greatest
integer such that 42 does not exceed the atomic weight
(From Proc. Roy. Soc. A., Vol. 136)
according as their mass numbers are divisible by 1, or on division by
4 leave a remainder of 1, 2 or 3; we shall return to this point below
(p. 58). The binding energies (and therefore the mass defects) are
shown in fig. 5; it will be seen that as we ascend in the periodic system
the binding energies (mass defects) increase rapidly at first, then slowly
fall of again as we come nearer to the radioactive elements.
The difficulties of a theoretical explanation of these facts arise not
only from our ignorance of the forces which act between particles at
distances approaching values smaller than the electronic radius, but
from certain other circumstances which cannot be understood without
explanations to be given in later chapters. One point is evident at
once. Since the diameter of the nucleus has been shown by collision
experiments to be of the same order of magnitude as the diameter
of the electron, it follows that the obviously suggested and long-
accepted idea that nuclei are built up of protons and electrons alone,


===== PDF PAGE 0075 =====

III] MASS DEFECT AND NUCLEAR BINDING ENERGY
57
presents difficulties. There is no room, as it were, for the electrons
inside a nucleus; indeed there are many indications that the radius
of the proton is approximately equal to that of the electron, and not
1840 times smaller, as we should expect from the formula e/mc.
The conclusion that there are no free electrons in nuclei can be drawn
more definitely from measurements of the angular momentum of
nuclei, the so-called nuclear spin. We shall return to the matter again
(§ 9, p. 176); here let only this much be said: in the quantum theory
the angular momentum of a particle is always a multiple of an elemen-
tary unit; and if several particles are conjoined, there must be simple
whole number relations between the angular momenta of the individual
partners and of the whole. These relations, though in the domain of
the external electronic envelope they hold without exception, are not
fulfilled in nuclei-a specially well-verified case is the nitrogen nucleus
N14. If we construct the nucleus from protons and electrons, then the
angular momenta behave as if there were only protons present (Heitler,
Herzberg, 1929).
Now we have to-day other particles at our disposal, above all the
neutron, and it is an obvious suggestion to try the experiment of
calling upon these for the elucidation of nuclear structure. All the above
difficulties are avoided, if we assume that the nuclei are composed of
protons and neutrons (Iwanenko, Heisenberg, 1932). In the first place,
with the help of simple assumptions about the interaction forces we
can then understand the fundamental fact that in light atoms the
atomic weight A is double the atomic number Z, while in heavy atoms
it increases somewhat faster than 2Z. Between two protons there acts
the Coulomb repulsion of their positive charges; between two neutrons
there presumably acts only a very small force, which may be neglected.
Between a neutron and a proton there must be a very considerable
attraction, to make the formation of the nucleus possible. We can
picture this force in some such way as we picture chemical binding
forces, which act between atoms, and whose quantum-theoretical
mechanism we know. It rests upon exchange of electrons (p. 255;
Appendix XXXI, p. 310) between two atoms; one or two electrons
oscillate from one to the other, and so produce i binding between a
pair of atoms, which has the character of saturation (chemical valency),
while other atoms are only attracted very much more weakly. In the
same way we can imagine an exchange of charge between proton and
neutron, connected with a kind of valency attraction. The numbers p
of the protons, and a of the neutrons, so adjust themselves that as
much energy as possible is set free in the binding process. This means,


===== PDF PAGE 0076 =====

THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[Снар.
if we neglect the Coulomb repulsion between the protons, that as
many pairs proton-neutron are formed as possible. If now the atomic
weight, or more exactly the mass number, A = p +n is given, the
most stable state for small numbers is that in which p=n; since
p = Z, the atomic number, it follows that A = 2Z. The more protons,
however, there are in the combination, the more will the Coulomb
repulsion come into account, and that clearly to the disadvantage of
the protons; hence the difterence n — p becomes > 0, and increases
with increasing p =Z. It follows that A =n + p > 2p, or 1 > 22,
and that A - 2Z increases as Z increases; and this is actually the
case. It is very probable that two pairs, proton-neutron, within a
nucleus always combine so as to form an a-particle, so far as that is
possible; for we know this binding to be particularly rigid (the mass
defect is great; see p. 55); also, it is a-particles which are emitted
from the unstable (radioactive) nuclei; and, finally, the nuclei with
atomic weight divisible by 4 form a specially regular series of mass
defects (p. 56). Moreover, the stability of the a-particle can be under-
stood, viz. on the ground of the behaviour of the angular momenta or
spins of the elementary particles, which have a tendeney towards
saturation (formation of systems with angular momentum nil, in
accordance with Pauli's principle; see § 5, p. 159). This theory gives
a very satistactory account of radioactive a-disintegration.
As for
P-disintegration, the expulsion of an electron, the new conception has
the advantage of reducing this to a single elementary process, via.
the disintegration of the neutron into a proton and in electron.
Recently, the expulsion of positrons has been observed from short-
lived (artificially produced) nuclei (p. 64); this process would be
the disintegration of the proton into neutron + positron. The charac-
teristic of the ordinary B-emission is, as we have seen (p. 31), a
continuous velocity spectrum; the same is true of the fit-emission
also. We have already pointed out the fundamental difficulty arising
from this fact; it means that the principle of energy is infringed in
these processes (as also, for that matter, the principle of the conserva-
tion of angular momentum, or spin). To save it, there is nothing for
it but to assume a third particle, which is concerned in the process, but
which in consequence of its properties escapes direct observation (Pauli,
Fermi, 1934). It must be very light, at least as light as the electron,
and can have no charge; it is therefore called a " neutrino". This is
no mere playful suggestion; for although the traces of the neutrino
will perhaps never be directly demonstrable, yet there is an indirect
proof of its existence, quite analogous to the one for the neutron


===== PDF PAGE 0077 =====

Ill] MASS DEFECT AND NUCLEAR BINDING ENERGY 59
(§6, p. 40). We see the tracks of atomic nuclei which have been struck;
we then infer the existence of the neutron by applying the principle
of conservation of momentum. In the case of the neutrino such hits
will be too rare; in their stead, however, we can use the recoil at the
emission. In ordinary radioactive materials, whose atoms are all very
heavy, the track of the recoiling atomic residue at a P-emission is
certainly too minute; but to-day we can also manufacture light radio-
active atoms artificially (§ 6, p. 61), and with these the recoil would
certainly be observable. If then the direction of the tracks of the
electron and of the atomic residuc are not exactly opposite, the assump-
tion of a third invisible particle would be preferable to giving up
even the conservation of momentum (Bethe, Peierls, 1934). If, besides,
experiments were to lead to a definite unique mass (as calculated
from energy and momentum, see Appendix V, p. 271), then the exis-
tence of the neutrino could not be doubted. These experiments, how-
ever, have not yet been carried out.
5. Heavy Hydrogen and Heavy Water.
Most isotopes play no part in the everyday practice of physicist
and chemist, since their difterences in mass are relatively slight,
and their properties almost identical. It is difterent with the recently
discovered isotope of hydrogen, the nucleus of which has about
double the mass of the proton; it has been given the name
deuteron (the second) and the symbol D. In this case essential
ditlerences occur in physical and chemical behaviour, so that we
can speak of an actually new clement, which is called deuterium.
The importance of this discovery becomes particularly evident
when we remember that the most important compound of hydrogen,
water (H,O), which physics from the beginning has taken as a stan-
dard substance, now turns out to be a mixture of several kinds of
molecule (H,0, HDO, DO), the molecular weights of which differ
from each other by 5 and 10 per cent. It is therefore fortunate that,
for other reasons of a practical nature, we have long since given up
the definition of the kilogram as the mass of 1000 e.c. of water at
its maximum density, defining it instead as the mass of a certain piece
of platinum-iridium.
We may relate the almost romantic story of the
discovery, which reminds one of the discovery of argon in the atmosphere
by Rayleigh and Ramsay (1894); in both cases the key to the dis-
covery was belief in the reality of minute discrepancies in different
measurements of the same magnitude. To begin with, two isotopes of
oxygen, of masses 17 and 18, were discovered spectroscopically; since


===== PDF PAGE 0078 =====

THE NUCLEAR ATOM
the frequencies of vibrations are inversely proportional to the square
root of the mass of the vibrating particle, the isotopes betrayed their
presence by the occurrence of displaced lines in the molecular spec-
trum. However, the intensity of the lines was very weak, and the
amounts of the isotopes so minute that they could not affect practical
measurements. Theoretically, however, the demonstration of their
existence, and the measurement of their relative amounts, had impor-
tant consequences. From these amounts, and the chemical molecular
weights, we can in fact calculate the mass of the H-atom, referred to
the principal isotope of O as 16. On the other hand, this same magni-
tude has been determined by Aston with the mass-spectrograph. It was
found by Birge and Menzel (1931) that a difference of 1/5000 remained
over, and they concluded that hydrogen also must contain a small
amount, about 1/4000, of a heavy isotope, of mass 2.* Thereupon spec-
troscopic investigations on hydrogen were undertaken by Urey, Brick-
wedde and Murphy (1931). We shall see that the position of the atomic
lines of an element also depends on the mass of the nucleus (p. 97).
Actually, weak satellites of the principal hydrogen lines were found
at the right distance. Various methods were then applied to produce
enrichment in the heavy isotope D, the most successful of these being
ordinary electrolysis (Urey and Washburn, Lewis and Macdonald, 1932).
It was found that the light H, escapes from the cathode & or 6 times
faster than the heavy De. If the original concentration was 1 in 5000,
the electrolysis of 6 litres of ordinary water should give us about 1 c.c.
of pure heavy water. In point of fact, sufficient quantities of heavy
water are now available to allow its properties to be investigated in
all directions. Another method of separation, that of Hertz already
mentioned (p. 37), depends on the difference in the rates of dif-
fusion of the gases; by this method about 1 c.c. of Do was obtained of
such purity that in the spectrum the atomic lines of H (the so-called
Balmer lines; see p. 93) were no longer visible at all. The exact
mass of the D-atom is 2•0147 (Aston, 1936), referred to the prin-
cipal isotope of O as 16, while that of the H-atom is 1-0081. From the
point of view taken by Heisenberg (p. 57), we must look upon the
D-nucleus as the combination proton + neutron. This has been directly
proved by decomposition into these particles by means of y-rays (Chad-
wick and Goldhaber, 1934; p. 65). The properties of heavy water
DaO, differ very noticeably from those of ordinary water, H,O; the
freezing-point is about 3-8°, the boiling-point about 1-1°, higher; the
* Recent measurements of Aston show, however, that this conclusion which has
proved so fruitful was based on incorrect measurements.


===== PDF PAGE 0079 =====

PLATE IV
Ch. III, Fig. 7.-Elastic collision of an a-particle with
a nucleus of hydrogen.
'The tracks of the two particles
after the collision are of nearly equal length.
Ch. H1, Fig. 8. Elastic collision of an "-particle with a
nucleus of nitrogen.
'The short track corresponds to the
1: 008
nitrogen. (From Proc. Kor. Soc. A. Vol. 134.)
lacing 1. 60


===== PDF PAGE 0080 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0081 =====

III]
HEAVY HYDROGEN AND HEAVY WATER
61
density is as much as about il per cent greater than that of H,O.
Similar results hold for other combinations in which H is wholly or
partly replaced by D. The velocities of reaction in these show consider-
able changes. Thus an entirely new branch of chemistry has emerged,
which is also important for biology.
For the physicist, however, the importance of heavy hydrogen is
mainly due to the fact that we can produce D canal rays just as easily
as I canal rays, and accordingly have now a new means of bombard-
ing other nuclei, which has already given us valuable information
about their constitution. Of this we shall speak in the following
section.
6. Artificial Disintegration of the Nucleus and Artificial Radioactivity.
As we know, all experience shows that radioactive nuclear dis-
integration cannot be affected by any ordinary physical means; it
takes place spontaneously in accordance with statistical laws. If we
had to depend on these processes alone, we would never get direct
information as to the structure of the majority of (non-radioactive)
nuclei, and would always have to rely on hypotheses.
The greatest importance, therefore, attaches to Rutherford's dis-
covery (1919) that nuclei can be broken up by bombardment with
a-rays. The first element with which this was accomplished was
nitrogen; in the cloud chamber, nuclear hits are occasionally seen in
which the track of the incident a-particle suddenly disappears, and the
track of the nucleus which was struck, and that of a particle of greater
range, begin where the first track ends (figs. 6, 7, 8, Plates III, IV).
The same result was afterwards obtained with many other elements,
boron, fluorine, neon, sodium, &c. (Rutherford, Chadwick, Kirsch and
Petterson, 1920-1925), and it was shown by deflection experiments
that the light particles expelled are protons. The a-particle is obviously
captured by the nucleus; from ,NI (below, the atomic number Z;
above, the mass number or rounded off atomic weight A) is formed the
isotope of oxygen of mass 17, already mentioned above, in accordance
with the equation
We are here at the starting-point of a sort of nuclear chemistry, the
laws of which, as in the example just given, can be written down in
a form exactly analogous to chemical formula. (We can also add the
binding energies, which are analogous to heat evolved or absorbed,
and which must exactly compensate the kinetic energies of the particles.)


===== PDF PAGE 0082 =====

62
THE NUCLEAR ATOM
The phenomenon, contrary to what was thought at first and is still
frequently said, is not one of destruction of the nucleus, but of a nuclear
transformation, which should rather be called nuclear construction.
More recently, many other swift corpuscular rays have been used to
bombard the nucleus, and the resulting transformations studied.
The first step was the discovery by Cockcroft and Walton (1932) that
artificially produced beams of protons, with energy of 120,000 electron
volts, equal to about imo
, a value quite trifling compared with the
energy of natural a-rays (about 16 mc?), are capable of breaking up
the nucleus of the lithium atom, according to the relation
In point of fact, it was shown in the Wilson chamber that two helium
nuclei, i.e. a-particles, were always shot out simultaneously in opposite
directions from the bombarded lithium foil (Kirchner, Dee and Walton,
1934; see Plate V, fig. 9). Similar transformations were successfully
brought about in a whole series of nuclei, and it is remarkable that
the measurements of the masses of the nuclei involved with help of
the mass-spectrograph and the determination of the kinetic energies
of the particles before and after the disintegration can be performed
with such accuracy that one gets a direct experimental verification
of Einstein's law E = me? (Bainbridge, 1933).
The nuclear-chemical processes take place without the incident
proton approaching the nucleus very closely in virtue of its kinetic
energy; for of course we can calculate how near the nuclei come by
equating the potential energy e-Z/r at the minimum distance to the
kinetic energy of a proton eV, where V is the accelerating potential: thus
V=CL
Hence, with an energy eV of 105 electron volts, i.e. 1•59 X 10-3 ergs,
80 that V = X 103 e.s.u., we have, for Z == 1,
+= 477X10-10X1X3X 10-3=14 X 10-13 cm.,
which is of the order of magnitude of the nuclear radius (§ 3, p. 51).
But the disintegration effect in lithium is demonstrable down to less
than 30,000 electron volts (Rausch von Traubenberg and Döpel, 1933),
in which case the proton is still far outside the nucleus. The explanation
of this fact will be given later (p. 183).
The heavy hydrogen isotope D has also been used to bring about
disintegration (Lewis, Livingstone and Lawrence, 1933) and proved


===== PDF PAGE 0083 =====

IIII ARTIFICIAL DISINTEGRATION OF THE NUCLEUS
TABLE III
ARTIFICIAL NUCLEAR TRANSFORMATIONS
(electrons
Radioactive nuclei emitting positrons are indicated by | +
Bombarding
,H?
1D=
aHea
Bombarded
Nucleus
2H03+0727
gLiG
gLi?
3Li®+1H1
aBe°
«Best onl
4Be8-+1D2
5B10+021
6013+221
+
3Li+ He*
6041+0n1
§ B10
3,Het
•013+,H1
3,Het
5BI2+,HL
3, Hetton!
• C12
,Be°+ He*
C13
5311+ 2H0*
SBut Hea
,NIA
d12+2H01
$ 016
AC13+3Het
Not Hot
8010+,H01
10No30
1-Mg26+, H1
1, 410-+ n
13A127+,H4
12 Mg?1
+
11151371-0721
134127
134198+, HI
I,Mg2+,H'
1000 tons


===== PDF PAGE 0084 =====

THE NUCLEAR ATOM
[CHAP.
extremely efective.
Thus, e.g., we get (according to Cockcroft and
Walton, 1934) a transformation of the light lithium isotope into the
heavy one,
and the protons so obtained have a very long range. There is no need
to quote all the transformations so far effected; with other processes,
to be discussed immediately, they are collected in Table III (p. 63).
An important discovery
is that of new isotopes of hydrogen and
helium, viz. H" (which should be called triton) and „He". They were
first found in disintegration experiments in the Cavendish Laboratory,
corresponding to the reactions (Oliphant, Harteck, Rutherford, 1934)
and (Oliphant, Kinsey and Rutherford, 1933)
Soon afterwards H' was directly demonstrated by the mass-spectro-
graph as a weak admixture with H and ,Da (Bleakney, Lozier and
Smith, 1934).
Neutrons were next employed as bombarding particles (Feather,
Harkins, 1932). It is probable on the face of it that these should give a
large output, since they are uncharged and so not repelled by the field
of the struck nucleus. This surmise has been confirmed, and led to the
discovery of a new class of transformations, of which we shall speak
presently. In point of fact, these transformations, which may be
described as an artificial production of radioactivity, were discovered
not with neutrons, but with a-rays, the discoverers being Irène Curie
and her husband Joliot (1934). For instance, it was found that alumi-
nium which was bombarded with a-rays and so sent out neutrons
continued to radiate after the irradiation was stopped, the emission
consisting of positive electrons. Clearly the initial product must, in
accordance with the equation
134127 + 3H0 → 15P30+011,
be an isotope of phosphorus, which is radioactive, and passes over into
an isotope of silicon, with emission of a positron:
15P30 → 19S:30 + 1B+.
The half-value period of the "radio-phosphorus" was found to be


===== PDF PAGE 0085 =====

III] ARTIFICIAL DISINTEGRATION OF THE NUCLEUS
65
3 min. This is long enough to allow the correctness of the interpretation
to be tested in these and similar processes by the old method of chemical
precipitation (p. 36). The proton and its isotope D also proved
useful for the production of radioactive nuclei.
The most abundant output, however, comes from neutrons, with
which Fermi and his collaborators (1934) have produced new radio-
active nuclei from the majority of known atoms. In spite of the
rather short lifetimes of these nuclei (some minutes) it was possible
to determine the chemical character of the products, and it was found
that the atomic number of the nucleus which captures a neutron
changes by 2 or 1 or 0, corresponding to the emission of an a-particle,
a proton or of light.
By passing them through substances like water or paraffin wax
which contain many hydrogen atoms, neutrons are slowed down by
the impacts with the protons conferring on these particles of equal
mass half their energy at each collision. In this way it is possible to
have neutrons nearly in thermal equilibrium with the surrounding
substance. These slow neutrons are particularly effective in producing
new nuclei, and they show many interesting properties, such as
selective absorption in special elements. The study of these processes
is one of the most powerful methods for revealing the laws of nuclear
structure.
Recently Chadwick and Goldhaber (1934) discovered a new type
of disintegration, using y-rays as bombarding agent. The heavy
hydrogen isotope D was shown to break up according to the relation
Thus the binding energy of the D-nucleus (D = p +n) was deter-
mined to be about 4•5mc?.
', and a value for the mass of the neutron
could be derived (1-0090).
At this point we conclude our brief survey of the state of knowledge
with regard to nuclei, and now turn to the structure of the external
electronic system. We are thus brought into regions whose linear
dimensions are several thousand times greater than those of the nucleus.
Here, by the co-operation of experimental and theoretical research,
the fundamental laws have in all essential respects been made clear.
But this was only made possible by the renunciation of ideas to which
people's minds had become so accustomed from their experience of
events on the large scale that a profound critical analysis had first
to be carried out.


===== PDF PAGE 0086 =====

CHAPTER IV
Wave-Corpuscles
1. Wave Theory of Light. Interference and Diffraction.
The ideas which we have arrived at in the preceding chapters with
regard to the structure of matter all rest on the possibility of demon-
strating the existence of fast-moving particles by direct experiment,
and indeed of making their tracks immediately visible, as in the Wilson
cloud chamber. These experiments put it beyond doubt that matter
is composed of corpuscles. We are now to learn of experiments which
just as definitely seem to be only reconcilable with the idea that a
molecular or electronic beam is a wave train. Before we enter upon
this, however, we shall briefly recall the main facts of wave motion
in general, using the phenomena of optical diftraction as a concrete
example.
While in the eighteenth century physicists almost universally adhered
to Newton's emission theory (about 1680), according to which light con-
sists of an aggregate of very small corpuscles, which are sent out by the
source of light, and the wave theory of Huygens (1690) could claim only
a few supporters (among them the great mathematician Euler), the
state of matters changed completely when at the beginning of the
nineteenth century Young made the discovery that in certain circum-
stances two beams of light can enfeeble each other, a phenomenon
quite incapable of explanation on the corpuscular theory. The results
of the further investigations of Young and Fresnel spoke unequivo-
cally in favour of the wave conception of Huygens, for it is impossible
to explain interference phenomena except by a wave theory.
We give here a short discussion of Young's interference experiment
(fig. 1). The source of monochromatic light Q illuminates the double
slit in the diaphragm B with parallel light by means of the lens L.
On the screen S behind the diaphragm a system of equidistant bright
and dark strips (fringes) appears. How this comes about may be
explained as follows. From the two openings in the diaphragm spherical
waves spread outwards; these are "coherent "
, i.e. they are capable
66


===== PDF PAGE 0087 =====

CHAP. IV]
WAVE THEORY OF LIGHT
67
of mutual interference. The two wave motions become superimposed,
and reinforce each other at those places where a crest of the one wave
coincides with a crest of the
other; on the contrary, they de-
stroy each other where a crest
of the one wave is superimposed
on a hollow of the other. Hence
we
can tell at once at what
places on the screen there will
Fig. I.-Diffraction at two narrow slits
close to
each other.
The difiraction pattern
consists of a system of equidistant bright and
dark bands (fringes).
be brightness; they are the points whose distances from the two
openings in the diaphragm differ exactly by an integral multiple
of the wave-length. From fig. I we see that the difference of the
distances is d sin p; there is therefore on the screen
brightness, if & sin p = nd
darkness, it daind = 180+814; 10=071, 72)
where d is the distance between the two openings, and p is the angle
of deflection.
A similar diffraction pattern is also obtained when light passes
through one shit. We can picture it roughly as due to the mutual
interference of the clementary Huygens waves spreading out from
the individual points of the slit. There are two essential differences,
however, as compared with the previous case. In the first place, we
easily see that the relation
d sind = na
(n = t 1, 12,...),
where d is the slit-wilth, does not now give the places at which there
is brightness, but those where there is darkness. For in the packet of
wave trains which spread out from the slit in the direction given by
the equation, all "phases" are in this case represented exactly the
same number of times: ie. we find in the packet exactly as many
wave trains which reach the screen with a crest, as trains which arrive
at it with a hollow; the trains will therefore extinguish each other.
We find, further, that the difiraction maxima are not, as before, all
equally bright; but that their intensity falls off very strongly from
the middle maximum outwards, in the way indicated in fig. 2 by tho
wavy line shown at the side. It should also be specially emphasized


===== PDF PAGE 0088 =====

68
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
that when the stit-width is reduced the diffraction pattern widens out,
as may easily be deduced either from the above equation defining the
position of the difiraction
minima, or directly from
fig. 2.
The fact that the form
of the diffraction pattern
depends essentially on the
Fig. 2.- Diffraction at a slit. The
diffraction
marition of intensity horse angront
shows
diffraction @ = o, and also a series of
equidistant maxima which become pro-
11.
gressively
weaker
as the angle of
diffraction increases.
wave-length of the light makes it possible to carry out spectral
investigations by means of interference phenomena (ruled geting,
echelon grating, Perot-Fabry plate, Lummer plate). For difirac-
tion patterns to show themselves, it is necessary that the width of
the slit employed should be of the order of magnitude of the wave-
length of the light. If then we wish to obtain interference pheno-
mena with X-rays, we have to use a grating in which the distance
between the rulings is of the order of magnitude of 1 A. = 10-8 em.
Such gratings are put into our hands by nature,
as von Laue (1912) has shown, in the shape of
crystals, in which the lattice distances are just
of this order of magnitude. If a beam of X-rays
is passed through a crystal, we do in fact obtain
Fig. 3.-Diffraction of X-rays at a crystal. As explained by
Bragg, the rays are reflected at the lattice planes of the crystal, and
thus made to interfere.
interference phenomena. Following Bragg (1913), we can interpret;
these as due to interference of the rays reflected at difterent lattice
planes of the crystal (fig. 3). Moreover, Compton (1925) and others
succeeded in producing X-ray interference in artificial gratings also,
this being found possible at grazing incidence of the rays.
Interference of X-rays supplies a powerful weapon for investigating
the structure of crystals. For this purpose we do not even require large
pieces of the crystal, but can use it in the form of powder (Debye-
Scherrer, 1915; Hull, 1917). The interference figures in the latter case
are rings round the direction of the incident beam. Indeed, the powder
grains may be of molecular size even. What is more, it is found that


===== PDF PAGE 0089 =====

IV]
WAVE THEORY OF LIGHT
the interference phenomena due to the individual atoms of the mole-
cule are by no means completely obliterated by the irregular setting
and motion of the molecules in liquids and gases. Circular interference
rings are observed, from the intensity distribution of which we can
draw conclusions with regard to the distances of the atoms in the mole-
cule (Debye, 1929). However, we shall not enter further into these
methods of investigating how matter is built up from atoms.
We add here, in the form of a scale, a summary of the wave-lengths
of the types of radiation at present known (fig. 4).
The scale is
Ultra;
Visible
Frays X-rays,
‚violet
Infra-red
Radio
Fig. 4.—Logarithmic scale of wave-lengths; the numbers shown refer to
a unit of length ^o = I cm., and represent logio (^/Л0)
logarithmic; the numbers shown are therefore indices of powers of
10. As unit 1, = 1 cm. is taken. Next to the wide range of wave-
lengths employed in wireless communication comes the region of
infra-red waves, which affect our senses as radiant heat. Then comes
the relatively narrow stretch of the visible region (7700 to 3900Ả.),
followed by the ultra-violet and Schumann regions, which in turn
lead into the domain of X-rays (100 to 0•05 À.).
The radioactive
y-radiation reaches to about 0•001 À. The cosmic radiation seems
to contain y-rays of very short wave-length (10-5 À.) which would
lie beyond the scale of our figure.
2. Light Quanta.
Great as has been the success of classical ideas in the interpretation
of interference phenomena, their incapacity to account for the pro-
cesses of absorption and emission of radiation is no less striking. Here
classical electrodynamics and classical mechanics absolutely fail
To give a few examples of this failure, we recall the experimental
fact that a hydrogen atom, for example, emits an infinite series of
sharp spectral lines. Now the hydrogen atom possesses only a single
electron, which revolves round the nucleus. By the rules of electro-
dynamics, an electron accelerated like this sends out radiation con-
tinuously, and so loses energy; in its orbit it would therefore neces-
sarily get nearer and noarer the nucleus, into which it would finally
plunge. The clectron, which initially revolved with a definite fre-
quency, will radiate light of this frequency; in the case when the
(E 908)
6


===== PDF PAGE 0090 =====

70
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CAP.
frequency of revolution changes (continuously) during the radiation
process, it will also emit frequencies close to the ground frequency;
but how then the spectrum of hydrogen should consist of a discrete
series of sharply separated lines, it is quite impossible to understand.
Further, the stability of the atom is inexplicable. We may think
by way of comparison of the system of planets circling round the sun,
all, when undisturbed, moving in their fixed orbits. Suppose, however,
that the whole solar system arrived in the neighbourhood of Sirius,
for example; the mere propinquity would suflice to deflect all the
planets out of their courses. If then the solar system moved away
again to a distance from Sirius, the planets would now revolve round
the sun in new orbits with new velocities and periods of revolution.
If the electrons in the atom obeyed the same mechanical laws as the
planets in the solar system, the necessary consequence of a collision
of the atom with another atom would be that the ground frequencies
of all the electrons would be completely changed, so that after the
collision the atom would radiate light of wave-lengths also entiroly
different. In direct opposition to this, we have the experimental fact
that an atom of a gas, which by the kinetic theory of gases is subjected
to something like 100 million collisions per second, nevertheless, after
these as before, sends out the same sharp spectral lines.
Finally, classical mechanics and statistics fail with the explanation
of the laws of radiation of heat (or energy). We shall not go into this
complex question in detail until later (Chap. VII. p. 185). and here
merely quote the result to which Planck (1900) was led by the above
considerations. To make the laws of radiation intelligible, he found
the following hypothesis to be necessary: emission and absorption
I radiant energy by matter does not take place continuously, but in finite
quanta of energy" hu (h = Planck's constant 6•55 x 10-27 org sc.,
v= frequency). On the other hand, the connexion with the cleetro-
magnetic theory of light is to be maintained to this extent. that
the classical laws are to hold for the propagation of the radiation
(diffraction, interference).
Einstein (1905), however, went even further than Planck. He not
merely postulated quantum properties for the processes of absorption
and emission of raciation, but also explained such properties is in-
herent in the nature of radiation itself. According to the hypothesis
of light quanta (photons) which he advanced, light consists of quanta
(corpuscles) of energy hv, which fly through space like a hail of shot,
with the velocity of light. Daring as at first sight this hypothesis
appears to be, there is nevertheless a whole sories of experiments


===== PDF PAGE 0091 =====

IV]
LIGHT QUANTA
7I
which seem scarcely possible to explain on the wave theory, but which
can be understood at once if we accept the hypothesis of the light
quantum. Some account of these experiments, which were cited by
Einstein himself in proof of his hypothesis, will now be given.
The most direct transformation of light into mechanical energy occurs
in the photoelectric effect (Hertz (1887), Hallwachs, Elster and Geitel,
Ladenburg). If short-wave (ultra-violet) light falls on a metal surface
(alkalies) in a high vacuum, it is observed in the first place that the
surface becomes positively charged (fig. 5); it is therefore giving oft
negative electricity, which issues from it
in the form of electrons.
We can now
Light
on the one hand, by capture of the elec-
trons, measure the total current issuing
Fig. 5.-Production of photoelectrons (after Lenard).
Light entering by the window F strikes the cathode C, and
there liberates
photoelectrons, which are accelerated (or
retarded) in the field between C and A.
from the metal surface, and on the other hand determine the velocity
of the electrons by deflection experiments or by a counter field.
Exact experiments have shown that the velocity of the emergent
electrons does not depend, as one might at first expect, on the
intensity of the light; but that only their number increases as
the light becomes stronger, the number being in fact proportional to
the intensity of the light. The velocity of the photoelectrons depends
only on the frequency of the light; for the energy E of the electrons
the following relation is found:
E = hU - 1,
where A is a constant characteristic of the metal.
From the standpoint of the light quantum hypothesis, both these
results can be understood at once. Every light quantum striking the
metal and colliding with one of its electrons hands over its whole energy
to the electron, and so knocks it out of the metal; before it emerges
however, the electron loses a part of this energy equal in amount to
the work, A, required to remove it from the metal. The number of
electrons expelled is equal to the number of incident light quanta,
and this is given by the intensity of the light falling on the
metal.
Evidence even more patent than this, for the existence of light
quanta, is given by the experiments of E. Meyer and W. Gerlach (1914)
on the photoelectric eflect with the small particles of metal dust, by


===== PDF PAGE 0092 =====

72
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
irradiation of these with ultra-violet light photoelectrons are again
liberated, so that the metallic particles become positively charged.
The advance on the previous case consists in this, that we can now
observe the time relations in the process of charging the particles,
by causing them to become suspended in an electric field, as in Milli-
kan's droplet method for determining e, the elementary electric charge;
a fresh emission of a photoelectron is then shown by the acceleration
caused by the increase of charge.
If we start from the hypothesis that the incident light actually
represents an electromagnetic alternating field, we can deduce from
the size of the particles the time that must elapse before a particle
of metal can have taken from this field by absorption the quantity of
energy which is required for the release of an electron. These times
are of the order of magnitude of some seconds; if the classical theory
of light were correct, a photoelectron could in no case be emitted
before the expiry of this time after starting the irradiation. But the
experiment when carried out proved on the contrary that the emission
of photoelectrons set in immediately the irradiation began—a result
which is clearly unintelligible except on the basis of the idea that light
consists of a hail of light quanta, which can knock out an electron
the moment they strike a metal particle.
3. Quantum Theory of the Atom.
Planck's original quantum hypothesis was that to every spectral
line there corresponds a harmonic oscillator of definite frequency y
which cannot, as in the classical theory, absorb or emit, an arbitrary
quantity of energy, but only integral multiples of hv. Niels Bohr (1913)
made the great advance of elucidating the connexion of these " oscil-
lators" with one another and with the structure of the atom. He
dropped the idea that the electrons actually behave like oscillators,
i.e. that they are quasi-clastically bound. His leading thought was
something like this. The atom does not behave like a classical
mechanical system, which can absorb energy in portions which are
arbitrarily small. From the fact of the existence of sharp emission
and absorption lines on the one hand, and from Einstein's light quantum
hypothesis on the other, it seems preferable to infer that the atom can
exist only in definite discrete stationary states, with energies Eo, Ej,
E2, ... .
Thus only those spectral lines can be absorbed for which
hy has exactly such a value that it can raise the atom from one
stationary state to a higher one; the absorption lines are therefore
defined by the equations E, - Eo = hu, Er - Eo= =hv..., where


===== PDF PAGE 0093 =====

IV]
QUANTUM THEORY OF THE ATOM
73
Ho is the energy of the lowest state in which the atom exists in the
absence of special excitation.
If the atom is excited by any process, ie. if it is raised to a state
with energy En→ Eo, it can give up this energy again in the form
of radiation. It can in fact radiate all those quanta whose energy is
equal to the difference of the energies of two stationary states. The
emission lines are therefore given by the equation
En - Em = hUm.
A direct confirmation of this theory can be seen in the following fact.
If Bohr's hypothesis is correct, an excited atom has open to it various
possible ways of falling back to the ground state by giving up energy
as radiation. For example, an atom in the third excited state can
either give up its excess of energy relative to the ground state in one
elementary process by radiating a line of the
frequency so; or it can begin with a transition
• 4
into the first excited state with the energy EL
- 3
and surrender of the energy quantum hva, and
then in a second radiation process (frequency
VIo) fall back into the ground state; and so
Fig. 6.-Ritz's Combination Principle.
2240
122'20
ght quantum of frequency rao, or as two quant:
frequencies must be exactly lso.
on (fig. 6). Since the total energy radiated must always be the
same, viz. Ez- Eo, the following relation must always exist between
the radiated frequencies:
Y30 = U31 + Y10 = V32 † V20 = V32 † vz1 † V10.
This combination principle must of course hold in all cases, and is
a deduction from the theory which can easily be put to the test of
experiment. Historically, it is true, the order of these two aspects of
the matter was reversed; for Ritz, eight years before Bohr's theory
was propounded, deduced this combination principle from collected
spectroscopic material which had been obtained by experiment. It
is by no means the case, however, that all possible "combination
lines" do actually occur with perceptible intensity.
A further direct confirmation of Bohr's theory on the existence of
discrete energy levels in the atom is given by the experiments of Franck
and Hertz (1914). If the atoms are supplied with energy in any way,
e.g. by electronic collision, i.e. by bombarding the atom with electrons,


===== PDF PAGE 0094 =====

74
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
then the atoms can only take up such portions of energy as exactly
correspond to an excitation energy of the atoms.
Thus, if we bombard the atoms with electrons whose kinetic energy
is less than the first excitation energy of the atoms, no communi-
cation of energy from the colliding electron to the atom takes place
at all (beyond the trifling amount of energy which is transferred in
accordance with the laws of elastic collision, and shows itself only in
the kinetic energy of the relative motion of the partners in the col-
lision). With respect to collisions of no great strength the atoms are
therefore stable in the ground state. Among such slight collisions are
those which a gas atom is subjected to in consequence of the thermal
motion of the particles of the gas. This is easily verified, roughly, as
follows. The mean kinetic energy of a gas particle, by the results of
the first chapter, is given by E = {kT, where k = R/L = 1-37 × 10-16
erg/degree; if the whole of this energy were converted at a collision
into excitation energy, the energy quantum hu = ZkT would be
transferred to the particle struck; where, if we take T = 300° K.
(room temperature), y will be 1013 sec-1 approximately. On the other
hand, frequencies of absorption lines in the visible or even in the
infra-red part of the spectrum have values about 1011 to 1015 sec-1.
Higher temperatures will therefore be necessary before " thermal
excitation" of the atoms of the gas becomes possible.
We return now to the collision experiments of Franck and Hertz.
We see that it the energy E of the electrons is less than the first
excitation energy E, - Eo, the atoms remain in the ground state.
If E becomes greater than E, - Eo, but remains less than Ez- Eo,
the atom can be brought by the collision into the first excited state, and
consequently when it falls back into the ground state radiates only
the line v = 110. If E + E, lies between Eg and Ez, the atom which
is struck can pass into either the first or the second excited state, and
so can radiate the lines v20, V21, and vo; and similarly in other cases
(figs. Ta, 76, Plate V). But we can also measure the energies of
the electrons after the collision, by causing them to enter an opposing
field of known potential difference, and observing the number of elec-
trons which pass through it. In this way also the energy relation was
found to be fulfilled exactly to this extent, that the energy loss of the
electron due to the collision with an atom was just equal to an excita-
tion energy En - E, of the atom.


===== PDF PAGE 0095 =====

PLATE V
Ch. IV, Fig. 0.- Difraction of electrons
by thin silver foil.
(After H. Mark and R.
Wierl.)
The velocity of the electrons (ac-
Ch. III, Fig. —Transmutation of lithium on bom-
celerating potential 3o kilovolts) corresponds
bardment with protons. Pairs of a-particles are shot out in
to i de Broglie wave-length of 00045 A.
opposite directions. (From Proc. Roy. Soc. A, Vol. 1+r.)
(Exposure to sec.)
07007
07701 (8-8)
5461 (7•7)
7060 (22 6)
6678 (23-0) 10
- 1916(92
2876 (23 01) 4
0016 (23 01) to.
439X (73)9
- 13-18 (9-0)
• 19:22 (2:3 6)
171:: (25-6, 1e
11109 co
1078 (79)
1472 (23 6) -
1047(7-71
LIAN 1214!9
21144 021-01
1906 (9-81
€ 1121(21 1)
.. 1120(2111)
4!s 21%)
3366331
3449 (22 1) -a
Do 3066 /
(N•&)
8.7v
11д. 74
tig. 7h
Ch. W, Pigs. 70, 76. lixcitation of spectral lines be electronic collision (alter Torte). Onl
those hines appear in the spoctrum whose excitation potential (the number in brackets) is smaller
than the energy of the electrons (given under the spoor). Pig. za refers to mercure, ab to helium.
The wave-lengths are stated in A.
E 008
lacing p. it


===== PDF PAGE 0096 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0097 =====

IVI
COMPTON EFFECT
4. Compton Effect.
The phenomena described up to this point prove only that energy
exchange between light and atoms, or between electrons and atoms,
takes place by quanta. The corpuscular nature of light itself is proved
in the most obvious way by the laws of frequency change in the scatter-
ing of X-rays. We have in an earlier chapter (Chap. III, p. 51) dis-
cussed the classical theory of the scattering of X-rays at compara-
tively weakly bound (nearly free) electrons, and reached the result
that the scattered radiation has always the same frequency u as the
primary radiation; for the electron vibrates in the same rhythm as
the electric vector of the incident wave and, like every oscillating
dipole, generates a secondary wave of equal frequency.
Compton (1922) investigated the scattering of X-rays by a block of
paraffin, and found that the radiation scattered at an angle of less
than 90° possesses a greater wave-length than
the primary radiation, so that the y of the
scattered wave, contrary to the prediction of the
classical theory, is smaller than the v of the
mU
Fig. 8.- Compton Effect.
light quantum on colliding wit
a electron transfers part of its energy to the latter, and its wave
length becomes greater after the scattering.
incident radiation (see fig. 8). On the principles of the wave theory,
this phenomenon is unintelligible.
The result, however, can be explained at once (Compton and Debye)
if, taking the corpuscular point of view, we regard the process as one
of elastic collision of two particles, the electron and the light quantum
(fig. 8). For if the light quantum hr strikes an electron, it will com-
municate kinetic energy to the electron, and therefore will itself lose
energy. The scattered light quantum will therefore have a smaller
energy hv. The exact calculation of the energy loss proceeds as in
the case of the collision of two elastic spheres; the total momentum
must be the same after the collision as before, likewise the total energy.
The full calculation is given in Appendix X, p. 279; here we merely
quote the result. The Compton formula for the change of wave-length of
the light quantum due to the scattering process runs:
42 = 21 sin 2
(1, = = 0•0242 A., the Compton wave-length).


===== PDF PAGE 0098 =====

76
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
The increase in the wave-length is accordingly independent of the
wave-length itself, and depends only on d, the angle of scattering.
The theory is susceptible of searching experimental tests, and is found
to be thoroughly in accord with the facts. In the first place, Compton
himself confirmed that the change of wave-length is correctly given by
the Compton formula. The recoil electrons, which according to the
theory are necessarily produced in the scattering process, and take
over the energy loss hr — hu of the light quanta in the form of kinetic
energy, were successfully demonstrated by Compton; and that not
only in scattering by solid bodies, but also in the Wilson chamber,
where the tracks of the recoil electrons can be seen directly.
But, as has been shown by Compton and Simon, we can take
a further step and test experimentally the relation between the angles
of scattering d and i of the light quantum and the electron. Certainly
a light quantum shows no track in the cloud chamber, but all the same
we can determine the direction of the scattered quantum, provided
it is scattered a second time and again liberates a recoil electron; the
direction of the scattered quantum being found as that of the line
joining the initial points of the tracks of the two recoil electrons.
Although in the actual carrying out of the experiment there is a con-
siderable amount of uncertainty, owing to the fact that several tracks
may be present, and it is not always possible to determine a pair
uniquely as corresponding to each other in the foregoing sense (i.e. pro-
duced by one and the same quantum), still Compton and Simon were
able to establish agreement between theory and experiment with a
fair amount of certainty.
Further confirmation of our ideas about the mechanism of the
Compton eftect was produced by Bothe and Geiger. They caused
X-rays to be scattered in hydrogen, and with & Geiger counter re-
corded when recoil electrons made their appearance; by means of a
second counter they determined the instants at which scattered light
quanta appeared. (The counter, it is true, did not react directly to
a light quantum striking it, but it did react indirectly to the electrons
liberated by the light quantum in the chamber of the counter.) They
succeeded in this way in establishing that the emission of the recoll
electrons took place at the same moment as the scattering of the light
quantum.
Recent investigations by Bothe, Jacobsen and others (1936) with
powerful modern equipment (made, it is true, to disprove a negative
result of Shankland), have definitely confirmed the simultaneous
appearance of the recoiling light quantum and electron.


===== PDF PAGE 0099 =====

IV]
COMPTON EFFECT
77
In the Compton scattering we have therefore a typical example
of a process in which radiation behaves like a corpuscle of well-defined
energy (and momentum); an explanation by the wave theory of
the experimental results which we have described seems absolutely
impossible. On the other hand, interference phenomena are quite
irreconcilable with the corpuscular view of radiation. Until a few
years ago, to explain this contradiction in the theory of light seemed
to be beyond the bounds of possibility.
5. Wave Nature of Matter. De Broglie's Theory.
The dilemma was still further intensified, when in 1925 de Broglie
propounded the hypothesis that the same dualism of wave and cor-
puscle as is present in light may also occur in matter. A material
particle will have a matter wave corresponding to it, just as a light
quantum has a light wave; and in fact the connexion between the
two opposing aspects must again be given by the relation E = hv.
Further, since from the standpoint of the theory of relativity energy
and momentum are entities of the same kind (momentum is the spatial
part of a relativistic four-vector, whose time component is energy),
it is obviously suggested that for consistency we should write p = hT;
if y denotes the number of vibrations per unit time, + must signify
the number of waves per unit length, and therefore be equal to
the reciprocal of the wave-length d of the wave motion; hence
0 = h/R.
The extension of the wave idea from optics to mechanics can be
carried through consistently. Before we go into this, however, we
should like once more to point out the "irrationality" (as Bohr calls
it) involved in thus connecting the corpuscular and wave conceptions:
E and p refer to a point mass of vanishingly small dimensions; v and ,
on the contrary, to a wave which is infinitely extended in space and
time. The imagination can scarcely conceive two ideas which appear
less capable of being united than these two, which the quantum theory
proposes to bring into such close connexion. The solution of this
paradox will occupy us later.
We shall first develop de Broglie's theory further from a formal
point of view. A particle of momentum p in the direction of the x-axis
and energy E is to be associated, then, with an infinitely extended
wave of the form u(x, t) = Ae-rin-i) by means of the two relations
E = ho, p= hT.
This wave advances through space with a definite velocity, the phase


===== PDF PAGE 0100 =====

78
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
velocity u. The value of u we can find at once, by considering the
(plane) surfaces of constant phase, viz.
0 = vt - tx = const.,
or x=
• It + const.;
it follows that
U =
(dt / =const
Since v is in general a function of 1, and conversely, this equation
embodies the law of dispersion of the waves.
But it must be remarked that the phase velocity is a purely arti-
ficial conception, inasmuch as it cannot be determined experimentally.
In fact, to measure this velocity it would be necessary to affix a mark
to the infinitely extended smooth wave, and to measure the velocity
of the mark. But the only way in which we can make a mark on the
wave train is by superimposing other wave trains upon it, which
mutually reinforce each other at a definite place, and so create a hump
in the smooth wave function. We have now to determine the velocity
with which this hump moves; it is called the group-velocity.
A general method is given in Appendix XI (p. 281); here we con-
fine ourselves to a simple special case, which gives the same result,
and brings out the difterence between phase-velocity and group-
velocity with particular clearness. On the primary wave, which we
suppose to have the form of ux, t) above, we superimpose a
wave with the same amplitude and a slightly different frequency
and wave-length X. In this case, as we know, "beat" phenomena
occur, and we make use of one of the beat maxima as the mark in our
wave train. What we are interested in, then, is the velocity with
which the beat maximum moves.
The superposition of the two wave trains gives us mathematically
a vibration of the form
This expression can be written
И (х, t) = е
т-т
It therefore represents a vibration of frequency (v + v)/2 and wave-


===== PDF PAGE 0101 =====

IV]
WAVE NATURE OF MATTER
79
length 2/(T + T), the amplitude of which varies slowly (beats) relative
to the vibration itself. The phase, as we deduce at once from the
formula, moves with the velocity (v +v)/(T+T). On the other
hand, the maximum of the amplitude moves
with the velocity
(v- v)(T-T). In the limit when y tends to v, and therefore
t to t, we find from this the value already found for the phase-
velocity
while the group-velocity is given by the limiting value
U = lim " — "
"→"т-ті
But this is simply, by definition, the derivative (differential coefficient)
of the frequency with reference to the wave-number t, if we regard
v as a function of + (law of dispersion); hence we have
--=-
d (1/2)
As is shown in Appendix XI (p. 281), this expression for the group-
velocity holds perfectly generally.
We now apply these formula to the case of a free particle with
velocity o. Writing @ for v/c, and employing the relativistic formula
for energy and momentum (see p. 271), we have here
v =
=-
+=P
T VI -pay
=-
k V(1 - 39)
The phase-velocity is given by
2 =
= - =
=
and is therefore greater than the velocity of light c, if the particle's
velocity is less than c. The phases of the matter wave are therefore
propagated with a velocity exceeding that of light another indication
that the phase-velocity has no physical significance. For the group-
velocity we find
de
U =
du dT
del d


===== PDF PAGE 0102 =====

80
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
it is exactly equal to the particle's velocity, for
=
moc
18
7 (1 - 82)3/23
moc
1
=
1(1 - 82)3/23
and therefore U = cß = v.
The relationship thus brought out is very attractive; in particular
it tempts us to try to interpret a particle of matter as a wave packet
due to the superposition of a number of wave trains. This tentative
interpretation, however, comes up against insurmountable difficulties,
since a wave packet of this kind is in general very soon dissipated.
We need only consider the corresponding case in water waves. If
we produce a wave crest at any point of an otherwise smootb surface,
it is not long before it spreads out and disappears.
6. Experimental Demonstration of Matter Waves.
In view of the boldness of de Broglie's hypothesis, that matter is
to be regarded as a wave process, the question of course at once sug-
gested itself, whether and in what way the hypothesis could be put to
the test of experiment. The first answer was given by Einstein (1925),
who pointed out that the wave idea gives a simple explanation of the
degeneration of elections in metals, which expresses itself in the abnormal
behaviour of metals in regard to their specific heat, and as an experi-
mental fact was known to theoretical physicists before de Broglie.
The subject will be discussed in detail in Chapter VII (§ 7, p. 217).
Further, it was known from the investigations of Davisson and
Germer (1927) that in the reflection of beams of electrons by metals
deviations occurred from the result to be expected on classical prin-
ciples, more elections being reflected in certain directions than in others,
so that at certain angles a sort of selective reflection took place. The
conjecture was first propounded by Elsasser (1925) that we have before
us here a diffraction effect of electronic waves in the metallic lattice,
similar to that which occurs in X-ray interference in crystals. The
exact investigations which were then undertaken by Davisson and
Germer actually gave interference phenomena in precisely the same
form as the known Laue interference with X-rays.
Further experiments by G. P. Thomson, Rupp and others showed
that when beams of electrons are made to pass through thin foils
(metals, mica), diffraction phenomena are obtained, of the samo kind


===== PDF PAGE 0103 =====

IV]
DEMONSTRATION OF MATTER WAVES
8I
as the Debye-Scherrer rings in X-ray interferences (fig. 9, Plate V).
Moreover, when the conditions of interference and the known lattice
distances were used as data, it was found that de Broglie's relation
between wave-length and the momentum of the electrons was com-
pletely confirmed.
The following rough calculation gives an indication of the kind
of wave-lengths we have to deal with in beams of electrons. Accord-
ing to de Broglie, we have 1 = h/p or, if we confine ourselves to elec-
trons of not too high speed, so that we can leave relativistic corrections
out of account, 1=h/mv. On the other hand, the velocity of the
electrons is determined by the potential V applied to the cathode
tube: mv =eV. Hence 1 =h/V(2meV), or, on inserting the
numerical values (e = 477 × 10-10 e.S.U., m = 9.0 X 10-28 gm., h =
6-55 × 10-27 erg sec.),
150
when V is expressed in volts. Thus, to an accelerating potential
of 10,000 volts there corresponds a wave-length of 0•122 Ä.; the wave-
lengths of the electronic beams employed in practice therefore lie in
approximately the same region as those of hard X-rays.
Although it is astonishing that the discovery of the diffraction of
electrons was not made earlier, the fact must nevertheless be con-
sidered a piece of great good fortune for the development of atomic
theory. What confusion there would have been if, soon after the dis-
covery of cathode rays, experiments had been undertaken simul-
taneously on their charge and capability of deflection, and on their
possibilities in regard to interference! Again, Bohr's theory of the
atom, which later was to serve as the foundation of the expansion
of atomic theory into wave mechanics, was essentially based on the
assumption that the electron is an electrically charged corpuscle.
To-day the technique of electronic diffraction is so far advanced
that it is already employed to some extent in industry instead of the
earlier methods with X-rays for the purposes of research on materials.
One advantage of using electrons is that decidedly higher intensities
are available than there are with X-rays. Thus, for example, an
interference photograph requiring an exposure of twenty-four hours
with X-rays can be produced by means of electrons, with the same
working data, in something like one second. Another advantage is
that the wave-length of the beams of electrons can be varied at will
by changing the tube potential; if the setting of the potentiometer is


===== PDF PAGE 0104 =====

82
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
changed, it can be seen at once on the screen how the whole difiraction
image contracts or expands according as the wave-length is made
shorter or longer.
Still more impressive than the establishment of the fact that elec-
trons when they pass through a crystal lattice behave like waves,
is the discovery of Stern and his collaborators (1932) that molecular rays
(of H, and He) also show difiraction phenomena when they are re-
flected at the surfaces of crystals. It was even possible to separate a
beam of molecules of nearly uniform velocity with the help of a device
similar to the arrangement for measuring the velocity of light: two
toothed wheels rotating on the same axis. De Broglie's equation was
confirmed for these particles with an accuracy of about 1 per cent.
Here, surely, we are dealing with material particles, which must be
regarded as the elementary constituents not only of gases (we recall
our discussion of the subject of the kinetic theory of gases), but also
of liquids and solids. If we intercept the molecular ray after its
diffraction at the crystal lattice, and collect it in a receiving vessel,
we find in the vessel a gas which has still the ordinary properties.
These difiraction experiments on whole atoms show that the wave
structure is not a property peculiar to beams of electrons, but that
there is a general principle in question; classical mechanics is replaced
by a new wave mechanics. For, in the case of an atom, it is clearly
the centroid of all its particles (nucleus and clectrons), i.e. an abstract
point, which satisfies the same wave laws as the individual free electron.
Wave mechanics in its developed form does actually render an account
of this.
%. The Contradiction between the Wave Theory and the Corpuscular
Theory, and its Removal.
In the preceding sections we have had a series of facts brought
before us which seem to indicate unequivocally that not only light,
but also electrons and matter, behave in some cases like a wave pro-
cess, in other cases like pure corpuscles. How are these contradictory
aspects to be reconciled?
To begin with, Schrödinger attempted to interpret corpuscles,
and particularly electrons, as wave packets. Although his formula are
entirely correct, his interpretation cannot be maintained, since on the
one hand, as we have already explained above, the wave packets must
in course of time become dissipated, and on the other hand the de-
scription of the interaction of two electrons as a collision of two wave
packets in ordinary three-dimensional space lands us in grave difliculties.


===== PDF PAGE 0105 =====

IV] WAVE THEORY AND CORPUSCULAR THEORY
The interpretation generally accepted at present goes back to the
present writer. According to this view, the whole course of events is
determined by the laws of probability; to a state in space there cor-
responds a definite probability, which is given by the de Broglie wave
associated with the state. A mechanical process is therefore accom-
panied by a wave process, the guiding wave, described by Schrödinger's
equation, the significance of which is that it gives the probability of a
definite course of the mechanical process. If, for example, the ampli-
tude of the guiding wave is zero at a certain point in space, this means
that the probability of finding the electron at this point is vanishingly
small.
The physical justification for this hypothesis is derived from the
consideration of scattering processes from the two points of view, the
corpuscular and the undulatory. The problem of the scattering of
light by small particles of dust or by molecules, from the standpoint
of the classical wave theory, was worked out long ago. If the idea of
light quanta is to be applied, we see at once that the number of incident
light quanta must be put proportional to the intensity of the light at
the place concerned, as calculated by the wave theory. This suggests
that we should attempt (Born, 1926) to calculate the scattering of elec-
trons by atoms, by means of wave mechanics. We think of an incident
beam of electrons as having a de Broglie wave associated with it.
When it passes over the atom this wave generates a secondary spherical
wave; and analogy with optics suggests that a certain quadratic
expression formed from the wave amplitude should be interpreted
as the current strength, or as the number of scattered electrons. On
carrying out the calculation (Wentzel, Gordon) it has been found that
for scattering by a nucleus we get exactly Rutherford's formula
(p. 53; Appendix IX, p. 276, and XX, p. 307). Many other scattering
processes were afterwards subjected to calculation in this way, and
the results found in good agreement with observation (Born, Bethe,
Mott). These are the grounds for the conviction of the correctness of
the principle of associating wave amplitude with number of particles
(or probability).
In this picture the particles are regarded as independent of one
another. If we take their mutual action into account, the pictorial
view is to some extent lost again. We have then two possibilities.
Either we use waves in spaces of more than three dimensions (with
two interacting particles we would have 2 × 3 = 6 co-ordinates),
or we remain in three-dimensional space, but give up the simple picture
of the wave amplitude as an ordinary physical magnitude, and replace


===== PDF PAGE 0106 =====

WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
it by a purely abstract mathematical concept (the second quantisation
of Dirac, Jordan) into which we cannot enter. Neither can we discuss
the extensive formalism of the quantum theory which has arisen from
this theory of scattering processes, and has been developed so far that
every problem with physical meaning can in principle be solved by
the theory (Appendix XXII, p. 312). What, then, is a problem with
physical meaning? This is for us the really important question, for
clearly enough the corpuscular and wave ideas cannot be fitted to-
gether in a homogeneous theoretical formalism, without giving up
some fundamental principles of the classical theory. The unifying
concept is that of probability; this is here much more closely inter-
woven with physical principles than in the older physics (e.g. the
kinetic theory of gases, § 2, p 3; § 6, p. 9). The elucidation of these
relationships we owe to Heisenberg and Bohr (1927). According to them
we must ask ourselves what after all it means when we speak of the
description of a process in terms of corpuscles or in terms of waves.
Hitherto we have always spoken of waves and corpuscles as given
facts, without giving any consideration at all to the question whether
we are justified in assuming that such things actually exist.
The
position has some similarity to that which existed at the time the
theory of relativity was brought forward. Before Einstein, no one
ever hesitated to speak of the simultaneous occurrence of two events,
or ever stopped to consider whether the assertion of the simultaneity
of two events at difterent places can be established physically, or
whether the concept of simultaneity has any meaning at all. In point
of fact Einstein proved that this concept must be "relativized"
, since
two events may be simultaneous in one system of reference, but take
place at different times in another. In a similar way, according to
Heisenberg, the concepts corpuscle and wave must also be subjected
to close scrutiny. With the concept of corpuscle, the idea is necessarily
bound up that the thing in question possesses a perfectly definite
momentum, and that it is at a definite place at the time considered.
But the question arises: can we actually determine exactly both the
position and the velocity of the "particle" at a given moment? If
we cannot do so-and as a matter of fact we cannot i.e. if we can
never actually determine more than one of the two properties (pos-
session of a definite position and of a definite momentum), and if
when one is determined we can make no assertion at all about the
other property for the same moment, so far as our experiment goes,
then we are not justified in concluding that the "thing" under
examination can actually be described as a particle in the usual


===== PDF PAGE 0107 =====

IV] WAVE THEORY AND CORPUSCULAR THEORY
sense of the term. We are equally unjustified in drawing this con-
clusion even if we can determine both properties simultaneously, if
neither can then be determined exactly, that is to say, if from our
experiment we can only infer that this "thing" is somewhere within
a certain definite volume and is moving in some way with a velocity
which lies within a certain definite interval. We shall show late
means of examples that the simultaneous determination of posi
and velocity is actually impossible, being inconsistent with quantum
laws securely founded on experiment.
The ultimate origin of the difficulty lies in the fact (or philosophical
principle) that we are compelled to use the words of common language
when we wish to describe a phenomenon, not by logical or mathema-
tical analysis, but by a picture appealing to the imagination. Common
language has grown by everyday experience and can never surpass
these limits. Classical physics has restricted itself to the use of con-
cepts of this kind; by analysing visible motions it has developed two
ways of representing them by elementary processes: moving particles
and waves. There is no other way of giving a pictorial description of
motions—we have to apply it even in the region of atomic processes,
where classical physics breaks down.
Every process can be interpreted either in terms of corpuscles or in
terms of waves, but on the other hand it is beyond our power to produce
proof that it is actually corpuscles or waves with which we are dealing,
for we cannot simultaneously determine all the other propertics which
are distinctive of a corpuscle or of a wave, as the case may be. We
can therefore say that the wave and corpuscular descriptions are
only to be regarded as complementary ways of viewing one and the
same objective process, a process which only in definite limiting
cases admits of complete pictorial interpretation. It is just the
limited feasibility of mcasurements that defines the boundaries
between our concepts of a particle and a wave.
The corpuscular
description means at bottom that we carry out the measurements
with the object of getting exact information about momentum and
energy relations (e.g. in the Compton effect), while experiments which
amount to determinations of place and time we can always picture to
ourselves in terms of the wave representation (e.g. passage of electrons
through thin foils and observations of the deflected beam).
We shall now give the proof of the assertion that position and
momentum (of an electron, for instance) cannot be exactly determined
simultaneously. We illustrate this by the example of diffraction
through a slit (fig. 10). If we propose to regard the passage of an electron
( E 908)
7


===== PDF PAGE 0108 =====

86
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[Снар.
through a slit and the observation of the diftraction pattern as simul-
taneous measurement of position and momentum from the standpoint
of the corpuscle concept, then the breadth of the slit gives the "un-
certainty" Ax, in the specification of position perpendicular to the
direction of flight. For the
fact that a diffraction pat-
tern appears merely allows
us to assert that the elec-
tron has passed through the
р.
1х
slit; at what place in the
slit the passage took place
remains quite indefinite.
Again, from the standpoint
of the corpuscular theory,
the occurrence of the dif-
Fig. IO.-Diffraction of electrons at a slit
raction pattern on the
screen must be understood
in the sense that the individual electron suffers deflection at the
slit, upwards or downwards. It acquires component momentum
perpendicular to its original direction of flight, of amount Ap (the
resultant momentum p remaining constant). The mean value of Ap,
by fig. Il, is given by Ap ~ p sina, if a is the mean angle of deflection.
We know that the experimental results can be explained satisfactorily
on the basis of the wave representation, according to which a is con-
nected with the slit-width Ax and the wave-length 1 = h/p by the
equation Ax sin a ~ 1 = h/p. Thus the mean added momentum in
the direction parallel to the slit is given by the relation
Ap ~ pX/Ax = h/Ax,
Or
Ax Ap ~h.
This relation is called Heisenberg's uncertainty relation. In our example
therefore, it signifies that, as the result of the definition of the electron's
position by means of the slit, which involves the uncertainty (or
possible erTor) Ax, the particle acquires momentum parallel to the
slit of the order of magnitude stated (i.e. with the indicated degree
of uncertainty). Only subject to this uncertainty is its momentum
known from the diffraction pattern. According to the uncertainty
relation, therefore, h represents an absolute limit to the simultaneous
measurement of co-ordinate and momentum, a limit which in the most
favourable case we may get down to, but which we can never get
beneath. In quantum mechanics, moreover, the uncertainty relation


===== PDF PAGE 0109 =====

IV] WAVE THEORY AND CORPUSCULAR THEORY
87
holds generally for any arbitrary pair of "conjugated variables".
A second example of the uncertainty relation is the definition of
position by a microscope (fig. 11). Here the order of ideas is as follows.
If we wish to determine the position of an electron in the optical way
by illuminating it and observing the scattered light, then it is clear,
and known as a general rule in optics, that the wave-length of the
light employed forms a lower limit to the resolution and accordingly
to the exactness of the determination of position. If we wish to define
the position as accurately as possible, we will employ light of the
shortest possible wave-length (y-rays). The employment of short-
wave radiation implies, however, the occurrence of a Compton scatter-
ing process when the electron is irradiated, so that the electron ex-
periences a recoil, which to a certain extent is
indeterminate. We may investigate the circum-
stinces mathematically. Let the electron under
the miscroscope be irradiated in any direction with
Fig. II.-Determination of the position of an electron by means of the
2
y-ray microscope.
4p
light of frequency v. Then by the rules of optics (resolving power
of the microscope) its position can only be determined subject to
the possible error
Ax~
sin a
where a is the angular aperture. Now, according to the corpuscular
view, the particle in the radiation process sufters a Compton recoil
of the order of magnitude hv/c, the direction of which is undetermined
to the same extent as is the direction in which the light quantum flies
off after the process.
Since the light quantum is actually observed
in the microscope, this indeterminateness of direction is given by the
angular aperture a. The component momentum of the electron per-
pendicular to the axis of the microscope is therefore after the process
undetermined to the extent Ap, where approximately
sin a.
Thus the order of magnitude relation
AX Ap~h
holds good here also.
Just as every determination of position carries with it an un-
certainty in the momentum, and every determination of time an


===== PDF PAGE 0110 =====

88
WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP.
uncertainty in the energy (although we have not yet proved the latter
statement), so the converse is also true. The more accurately we
determine momentum and energy, the more latitude we introduce
into the position of the particle and the time of an event. We give an
example of this also, viz. the so-called resonance fluorescence. We have
seen above (p. 73) that the atoms of a gas which is irradiated with light
of frequency no, corresponding to the energy difference between the
ground state and the first excited state, are raised to the latter state.
They then fall back again to the lower state, at the same time emitting
the frequency o; and if the pressure of the gas is sufficiently low,
so that the number of gas-kinetic collisions which occur while the
atom remains in the excited state is negligible, then the whole energy
which was absorbed will again be emitted. Thus the atom behaves
like a classical resonator which is in resonance with the incident light
wave, and we speak of resonance fuorescence.
But the energy of excitation of the atoms can also be utilized, not
for re-emission of light, but for other actions, by introducing another
gas as an indicator.
If the latter consists, say, of not too rigidly
bound diatomic molecules, the energy transferred in collisions with
the excited atoms of the first gas can be utilized for dissociation
(Franck, 1922). Again, if the added gas is monatomic, and has a lower
excitation level than the first gas, it is itself caused to radiate by the
collisions; this is called sensitized fluorescence (Franck). In any
case we see that a fraction of the atoms of the first gas is certainly
thrown into the excited state by the exciting light. We may take
the following view of the matter. Excitation by monochromatic light
means communication of exact quanta huo to the atom. We there-
fore know the energy of the excited atoms exactly. Consequently,
by Heisenberg's relation AEAt ~h, the time at which the absorp-
tion takes place must be absolutely indeterminate. We can satisfy
ourselves that this is so, by considering that any experiment to de-
termine the moment in question would necessarily require a mark
in the original wave train—an interruption of the train, for example.
But that means disturbing the monochromatic character of the light
wave, and so contradicts the hypothesis. A rigorous discussion of the
circumstances shows that, if the light is kept monochromatic, the
moment at which the elementary act happens does actually altogether
elude observation.
The uncertainty relation can also be deduced from the following
general idea. If we propose to build up a wave packet, extending for
a finite distance in the x-direction, from separate wave trains, we


===== PDF PAGE 0111 =====

IVI WAVE THEORY AND CORPUSCULAR THEORY
89,
need for the purpose a definite finite frequency-range in the mono-
chromatic waves, i.e., since 1 = h/p, a finite momentum-range in the
particles. But it can be proved generally (Appendix XII) that the
length of the wave packet is connected with the requisite range of
momenta by the relation
ApAX~h.
The analogous relation
can be derived in a similar way.
Bobr is in the habit of saying: the wave and corpuscular views
are complementary. By this he means: if we prove the corpuscular
character of an experiment, then it is impossible at the same time to
prove its wave character, and conversely. Let us illustrate this further
by an example.
Consider, say, Young's interference experiment with the two slits
(p. 67); then we have on the screen a system of interference fringes.
By replacing the screen by a photoelectric cell, we can demonstrate
the corpuscular character of the light even in the fringes. It there-
fore appears as if we had here an experiment in which waves and
particles are demonstrated simultaneously. Really, however, it is
not so; for, to speak of a particle means nothing unless at least two
points of its path can be specified experimentally; and similarly with
a wave, unless at least two interference maxima are observed. If then
we propose to carry out the "demonstration of a corpuscle"
, we must.
settle the question whether its path has gone through the upper or
the lower of the two slits to the receiver. We therefore repeat the
experiment, not only setting up a photoelectrically sensitive instru-
ment as receiver, but also providing some contrivance which shows
whether the light has passed through the upper slit (say a thin photo-
graphic film or the like). This contrivance in the slit, however, neces-
sarily throws the light quantum out of its undisturbed path; the
probability of getting it in the receiver (the screen) is therefore not
the same as it was originally, i.e. the preliminary calculation by wave
theory of the interference phenomenon is illusory. Thus, if pure
interference is to be observed, we are necessarily precluded from
making an observation of any point of the path of the light quantum
before it strikes the screen.
We add in conclusion a few general remarks on the philosophical
side of the question. In the first place it is clear that the dualism,.
wave-corpuscle, and the indeterminateness essentially involved thereing.


===== PDF PAGE 0112 =====

90
• WAVE-CORPUSCLES
[CHAP. IV
compel us to abandon any attempt to set up a deterministic theory.
The law of causation, according to which the course of events in an
isolated system is completely determined by the state of the system
at time t = 0, loses its validity, at any rate in the sense of classical
physics. In reply to the question whether a law of causation still holds
good in the new theory, two standpoints are possible. Either we may
look upon processes from the pictorial side, holding fast to the wave-
corpuscle picture-in this case the law of causation certainly ceases
to hold; or, as is done in the further development of the theory, we
describe the instantaneous state of the system by a (complex) quantity
4, which satisfies a differential equation, and therefore changes with
the time in a way which is completely determined by its form at time
t= 0, so that its behaviour is rigorously causal.
Since, however,
physical significance is confined to the quantity | 4|? (the square of
the amplitude), and to other similarly constructed quadratic expres-
sions (matrix elements), which only partially define t, it follows that,
even when the physically determinable quantities are completely
known at time t = 0, the initial value of the d-function is necessarily
not completely definable. This view of the matter is equivalent to
the assertion that events happen indeed in a strictly causal way, but
that we do not know the initial state exactly. In this sense the law
of causation is therefore empty; physics is in the nature of the case
indeterminate, and therefore the affair of statistics.


===== PDF PAGE 0113 =====

CHAPTER V
Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines
1. The Bohr Atom; Stationary Orbits for Simply Periodic Motions.
We have already had before us (Chap. IV, § 2, p. 69) a series of
arguments to prove that the classical laws of motion cease to hold
good in the interior of atoms. We recall in particular the existence of
sharp spectral lines, and the great stability of atoms, phenomena
which from the classical standpoint are perfectly unintelligible.
Bohr's explanation of spectra, which we
expounded in § 3,
p. 72, points out the road we must follow in setting up a new
atomic mechanics.
In fact, long even before the discovery of
the wave nature of matter, an at least provisional atomic mechanics
was successfully founded by Bohr and developed by himself and his
collaborators, the most prominent of whom is Kramers.
The leading idea (Bohr's correspondence principle, 1923) may be
stated broadly as follows. Judged by the test of experience, the laws
of classical physics have brilliantly justified themselves in all processes
of motion, macroscopic and microscopic, down to the motions of atoms
as a whole (kinetic theory of matter). It must therefore be laid down,
as an unconditionally necessary postulate, that the new mechanics,
supposed still unknown, must in all these problems reach "the same
results as the classical mechanics. In other words, it must be demanded
that, for the limiting case of large masses, or orbits of large dimen-
sions, the new mechanics passes over into classical mechanics.
We may obtain a concrete idea of the significance of the correspon-
dence principle from the example of the hydrogen atom, which
according to Rutherford consists of a massive nucleus, with an electron
revolving round it. By the laws of classical mechanics (Kepler's first
law) the orbit of the electron is an ellipse, or in special cases a circle;
in the following discussion we shall confine ourselves to this special
case. Let the radius of the circular orbit be a, and let it be described
91


===== PDF PAGE 0114 =====

92
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
with the angular velocity w. These two quantities are connected by
the relation
Ze?
m
which corresponds to Kepler's third law; it follows from the equality
of the centrifugal force maw? and the Coulomb force of attraction
Ze /a?, where Z is the nuclear charge number (1 for H, 2 for Het,
3 for Litt, and so on).
What specially interests us here is the value of the energy of the
revolving electron. By the principle of energy the sum of the kinetic
and the potential energy is constant:
_ = B.
In this equation the energy, which is indeterminate to the extent of
an additive constant, is so normalized that E denotes the work needed
just to release the electron from its connexion to the atom, i.e. to
bring it to rest (aw → 0) at an infinite distance (a → co) from the
nucleus. By combining the two equations, we find
E=-
It follows from this that
|E|
Z-e*m
_ =
8
is constant. We may add that this equation also holds in the case
when the orbit is an ellipse (with semi-major axis a) if we understand
that w means 2m/T, where I is the period of a revolution (see also
Appendix XIV, p. 286).
So much for the hydrogen atom, according to classical ideas and
fundamental laws; to any orbital radius a, or to any angular velocity
w, there corresponds a definite value E of the energy, while a, or w,
can assume any value we choose.
In contrast with this we have the hypothesis of Bohr (§ 3, p. 72),
according to which the atom can exist only in definite discrete states,
and, at a transition from a state with the energy E, to a state with
the smaller energy Ez, emits the spectral line for which hv = E, - Ez-
From the frequencies of the emission or absorption lines we can find
the energies of the individual Bohr states.


===== PDF PAGE 0115 =====

THE BOHR ATOM
93
Now the relations observed in the line spectrum of the hydrogen
atom are known very exactly (fig. l). It was Balmer (1885) who first
showed that the lines situated in the visible region— all that were then
known-can be represented by the formula
with a spectral line corresponding to every integral value of m > 2;
R being a constant, the so-called Rydberg constant, the value of
which was afterwards determined very exactly by Paschen (1916):
R = 109678 cm.-1.
Here v, in accordance with the usage of spectroscopists, stands for the
wave number, i.e. the number of wave-lengths per cm.: v = 1/1.
Hoe
Hp
^ = 6563
4867
4340 4702
3646 A
Fig. I.—Diagram of the Balmer series, showing the notation used for the individual lines
The form of the above equation suggests the idea that the general
law for the frequencies may be obtained by taking nº instead of 4
(= 22):
In fact, on the basis of this formula the lines corresponding to the
values n = 1, 3, 1, ... could likewise be determined spectroscopically;
they were not found in the earlier investigations, since they lie outside
the visible spectral region. To-day the following series, called after
their discoverers, are known:
n = 1: Lyman series (ultra-violet),
n = 2: Balmer series (visible),
n = 3: Paschen series (infra-red),
n = 4: Brackett series (infra-red),
...•
It ought further to be particularly remarked that the agreement
between the numbers given by the preceding formula and the values
found spectroscopically is extraordinarily close. The accuracy of


===== PDF PAGE 0116 =====

94
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
spectroscopic work is high, and allows the position of the lines to be
determined to 5 or 6 figures, yet the values calculated by the formula
only differ from the observed values by at most a few units in the last
place. The form of Balmer's equation-the difference of two expres-
sions of the same type suggests, in view of Bohr's theory, that these
expressions should be brought into connexion with the energy levels
(terms) of the Bohr atomic model:
hR
=--
(Balmer term).
n?
The frequency emitted, when the atom makes a transition from a
state n to another state m, is then
given, in agreement with the Bal-
mer formula, by the relation
2
hu = En-Em.
If we know the term scheme for an
atom, we can at once read off
from it the structure of the spec-
• 1216
trum. For the hydrogen atom
the term scheme has the form
Fig. 2.- Term diagram for the hydrogen
atom. The most important lines of the hydrogen
spectrum (with some wave-lengths, in A.) are
shown as transitions between two terms.
shown above (fig. 2). The energy scale is normalized in such a way
that its zero point corresponds to n → co. Beginning at the lowest
term Ey, the terms follow each other more and more closely, and
asymptotically approach the limit Ec = 0.
In what precedes we have contrasted the statements of classical
atomic mechanics with the results of experimental research.
The
latter, on Bohr's interpretation, give discrete energy levels with the
values En = -hR/n, where R stands for a constant determined
experimentally. It is of course the business of the new atomic
mechanics to explain the value found for the Balmer term. The line of
approach to the solution of the problem is indicated by the principle
which we stated at the outset (p. 91) the correspondence principle.
In the application to the hydrogen atom, this principle asserts that
the higher the Bohr state of the atom is, the more closely the atom
obeys the laws of classical mechanics; as n increases, the intervals


===== PDF PAGE 0117 =====

THE BOHR ATOM
95
between the individual energy levels become smaller and smaller, the
levels come closer and closer, and the atom approaches asymptotically
the state of motion required by classical mechanics.
If then we calculate the emitted frequency by the Balmer formula,
for the case when the initial and final states are highly excited states,
we find, if m —n is small compared to m and n, the value
2R
(m -n).
The lowest frequency emitted is got by taking m —n = 1, viz.
2R
for m -n = 2 we get a frequency twice as high, for m -n = 3 one
three times as high, and so on. The spectrum has therefore the same
character as that of an electrically charged particle vibrating, on the
classical theory, with the proper frequency w = 2mv, and the associated
harmonic frequencies. If we now introduce the ground frequency v1
instead of the ordinal number n in the energy formula (Balmer term),
we obtain (with w = 2mv) the expression
E~-hR(
°=- (Ring)
*=- (R)
2R
This formula, in regard to the way in which it involves the frequency,
has exactly the same structure as the formula which we obtained
above (p. 92) for the energy of the classical revolving electron. As
there, we have
| E|8
Rh3
co?
16713= constant.
But, according to the correspondence principle, in the limiting case
of very high values of n, i.e. of very low frequencies, the two formula
must agree. It follows that
R = R,Z,
where
2n=me4
Ro = h3
Hence, on the basis of the correspondence principle, and under the
assumption that the energy values are actually given by the Balmer
terms, we have even at this early stage obtained an unambiguous


===== PDF PAGE 0118 =====

ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
statement about the value of the Rydberg constant appearing in the
Balmer term, and accordingly a possible means of testing the
theory.
If we insert the values of e, m and h, as determined by other
methods, in the formula for Pu,, we find F, ~ 3-290 X 1015 sec. -1, or,
when converted into wave numbers, R, ~ 109700 cm.; a value
which, within the limits of accuracy of our present knowledge of the
values of e, m and h (a few thousandth parts), agrees with the experi-
mental value. Moreover, the formula depends in the right way on the
ordinal number Z, as is shown by measurements on the ions Het,
L1t, . ..
Additional evidence for the legitimacy of our argument is given
by the tact that by a simple extension of the above formula the motion
of the nucleus can also be taken into account, and that its effect, as
thus found, upon the values of the terms has been completely verified
by experiment. In the calculation given above, we proceeded as if the
nucleus had infinite mass, and therefore assumed it to be at rest. In
reality its mass, though certainly great compared to the mass m of an
electron (~ 1840 m for the hydrogen nucleus), is still finite. It follows
that the nucleus must also move when the electron revolves, and that
it describes a circular orbit round the common centre of mass with
the same angular velocity w as the electron, since of course the centre
of mass of the whole atom is to be at rest. If we denote the radii of the
orbits of electron and nucleus by de and an, then by the detinition of
the centre of mass we have ma = Man, where M is the mass of the
nucleus.
The equality of centrifugal force and Coulomb attraction
gives then
Ze?
ma co? = Ma,w?=
In the formula for the energy the motion of the nucleus manifests itself,
first, in the additional term Man'w? arising from the kinetic enorgy
of the nucleus; and, secondly, in the fact that the potential energy
contains, not as before the radius of the circular orbit of the electron,
but the sum de tan By the same process as before (p. 92), we
obtain here the formula
$
S(1 +m 1),
If now, using the correspondence idea, we equate this value of
the energy to the value
coming from the Balmer term for high


===== PDF PAGE 0119 =====

VI
THE BOHR ATOM
97
quantum numbers, we obtain for the Rydberg constant the expression:
R 27,
R= I+m/M
Ro =
The motion of the nucleus manifests itself therefore in a correcting
factor, which indeed amounts only to fractions of a thousandth part,
but which the high accuracy of spectroscopic methods allows to be
exactly tested.
Apart from the correcting factor, every energy term of even order
of singly ionized helium coincides, according to the theory, with a
hydrogen term, because Z = 2 for Het; and therefore the second
term of Het is the same as the first of H, the fourth of Het the same
as the second of H, and so on. If, however, the motion of the nucleus is
taken into account, these terms become separated, since the helium
nucleus has four times the mass of the hydrogen nucleus, and there-
fore participates to a slighter degree in the motion of the electron than
the latter. In fact, the formula for the energy terms of even order
(2n) of Het gives the expressions
4R h
Rh
while the hydrogen terms are given by
Roh
(1 + m/M=)n°
Every alternate helium line therefore almost, but not quite, coincides
with a hydrogen line; the distance between them is easily calculated
from the above formula; as to order of magnitude, it is approximately
in the ratio m/M smaller than the wave-length of the lines themselves
and therefore roughly of the order of magnitude of 1 A, so that it can
easily be measured spectroscopically. Experimental tests of this result
of the theory have verified it completely.
We may mention further that the value of the Rydberg constant,
as measured by Paschen on the lines of hydrogen, which we have given
above, is not equal to Ro, but equalto Ro/(1 + m/Ma). We thus find
the value
Ro = 109737 cm.-7.
It is at once obvious that the dependence of the frequency of the
spectral lines on the mass of the nucleus will hold for other atoms
also; it therefore becomes a possibility to discover isotopes spectro-


===== PDF PAGE 0120 =====

98
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHaP.
scopically. The most important case is that of the heavy hydrogen
isotope D itself, for which our formula holds exactly, if we insert.
the nuclear mass My. In point of fact, as has already been mentioned
(p. 60), the isotope D was first discovered by these spectroscopic
methods.
The line of thought followed so far may be summarized as follows.
Classical mechanics, on the basis of the picture of the electron revolv-
ing round the nucleus, certainly enables us to deduce formula for the
connexion between orbital radius, frequency of revolution, and energy,
but it is incapable of explaining the spectrum emitted by the atom.
For the latter purpose we have, following Bohr, to introduce a new
hypothesis, viz. that the atom only possesses certain definite energy
levels En = -hR/n; and it is the business of the new mechanics to
explain these energy levels. From the correspondenco principle, i.e.
from the single requirement of asymptotic agreement of the new
mechanics with the old for large quantum numbers, we have already
been able to obtain definite information with regard to the connexion
between the experimentally determined Rydberg constant and the
atomic constants e, m and h. But even so, there is still no explanation
of why the Balmer terms occur at all; up to this point we only know
that, if we make the special assumption that the formula In = - Rh/n
is correct, then on account of the correspondence principle the factor
of proportionality R must depend in a definite way on e, m. and hi.
It is for the new mechanics to explain these assumptions, or at least
to make them intelligible. We may mention in anticipation that this
was not accomplished until the introduction of wave mechanies.
Nevertheless, we shall in the following pages deal briefly with the
leading features and most important results of Bohr's quantum theory
of the atom, since these are not only partly required as foundations
for the structure of wave mechanies, but are also capable of explaining
many experimental results.
In the first place, we collect here, in connexion with the preceding
calculations, a few formula which are of great importance for the
further development of Bohr's theory. If in the Bohr atom we think
of the electrons as revolving in definite fixed orbits (ellipses, rireles)
round the nucleus, then with every energy level of the atom (in the
special case of a circular orbit) we can associate a radius, an angular
velocity, and so on, on the basis of the formula of classical mechanics.
It then follows from the formula already given (p. 92) that (neglect-
ing the motion of the nucleus) we have for the radius a of the circular
orbit corresponding to the nth energy state


===== PDF PAGE 0121 =====

THE BOHR ATOM
Zein?
where
do = Arime = 0:528 A.
represents the radius of the first circular Bohr orbit in the hydrogen
atom or, briefly, the "Bohr radius". Similarly, for the angular velocity,
we find the expression
AT R, 7=
W=
2_w,22
nơ
n3"
with
000 = 4P0 = 4-13 X 1016 sec.-".
Of special importance is the formula for the angular momentum (or,
in other words, the moment of momentum) of the electron about the
nucleus; from the two preceding formula it follows that
In the Bohr atom the angular momentum is equal to a multiple of
h/2. This fact is called the quantum condition for angular momentum.
Conversely, we may postulate this condition, and, by working
backwards and using the formula of classical atomic mechanics, deduce
the Balmer terms. Thus (p. 92), from
Ze?
Ze'
E=
-
and aw?=
m'
it follows that
Z-et
Z-em,
=-
2matu=-2p3
where p = maw denotes the angular momentum. If we substitute the
value of p from the quantum condition, we find at once
Z-ekm 4m?
E =-
2
It seems now a natural suggestion, that we should regard the quanti-
sation condition for the angular momentum as an essential feature of
the new mechanics. We therefore postulate that it is universally valid
At the same time, we must show by means of examples that the postu-
late leads to reasonable results. Although from the standpoint of


===== PDF PAGE 0122 =====

IO0
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
Bohr's theory the underlying reason for this quantisation rule remains
entirely obscure, nevertheless in the further development of the theory
it has justified itself by results.
As an example we take the case of the rotating molecule, which we
treat as a rotator (le. as a rigid body which can rotate about a fixed
axis). If A is its moment of inertia about this axis, then its kinetic
energy when rotating with angular velocity w is, according to classical
mechanics,
and there is no potential energy. The angular momentum about the
axis is found from the energy by differentiating with respect to wi
p = Aw.
We now apply the formula for the angular momentum, found for tho
case of the hydrogen atom:
1=1 277
where n denotes a whole number. Eliminating w, we obtain the energy
formula:
En = 2?
2A =
This expression for the value of the energy is called the Deslandres
term. To this term scheme there corresponds a definite emission
spectrum. The transition from the nth state to the (n - I)th is bound
up with the emission of a line of frequency
1781(1 3).
8П A
The spectrum consists of a sequence of equidistant lines, giving us the
simplest type of band spectrum. Other transitions than those to the
next lower (and nest higher) state cannot occur, as follows from corre-
spondence considerations; for, as we have already shown in the case
of the hydrogen atom, and as we also see here at once, transition to
the next quantum state but one, or to the next but two, for high
quantum numbers involves the emission of double, or three times, the
ground frequency, i.e. of harmonics. Now, classically, in the Fourier


===== PDF PAGE 0123 =====

THE BOHR ATOM
IOI
expansion for circular motion (rotator), only the ground frequency
occurs:
x= a coscut, y = a sinwt;
and the same of course holds good for the emitted radiation as calcu-
lated classically. Therefore, by the correspondence principle, in the
quantum theory also no lines can be emitted which correspond to the
classical harmonics in the Fourier resolution of the orbital motion;
in other words, we have for the rotator the selection rules: n →n - 1
for emission transitions, and n →n + 1 for absorption transitions.
We have only proved these rules, it is true, for high quantum numbers,
since we have made use of the correspondence principle; but it is
obviously suggested that we should postulate their validity for all
quantum numbers.
2. Quantum Conditions for Simply and Multiply Periodic Motions.
The quantum condition for the angular momentum, which we
have deduced from the Balmer term (which is given by experiment),
and the application of which to the rotating molecule led us to the
Deslandres term (which is in agreement with experiment), gives an
indication of the way we have to follow in constructing the new
mechanics. It comes to this clearly, that certain quantities can only
take values which are whole numbers-they are called quantisable
quantities--and the question arises of how in general these quantisable
quantities are to be discovered. We shall try to make the matter clear
with the aid of simple examples; and in Appendix XIII (p. 283) we give
a general formulation of the problem on the basis of the Hamiltonian
theory.
An idea of Ehrenfest's (1914) is helpful at this point. Consider a
mechanical system, in which such quantisable variables occur, that
is to say, quantities capable of integral values only. If we introduce
a small disturbance, the new mechanics must hold good in the dis-
turbed system just as in the undisturbed, so that the quantities in
question must still have integral values. They must therefore at the
beginning of the disturbance either have changed by a whole number
at a jump, or have remained constant. If the actions affecting the
system change slowly, the latter must be the case;
when that is so,
we say that these quantities are adiabatically invariant. As the con-
verse of this argument, we may propound the theorem, that only adia-
batically invariant quantities are quantisable. It is therefore necessary
to discover such quantities, under the classical laws of motion.
(E 908)
8


===== PDF PAGE 0124 =====

I02
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHap.
We may show by a simple example how this can be done. Con-
sider a simple pendulum (fig. 3) whose length can be altered, say
by drawing the thread over a pulley. If we shorten the thread
slowly, we do work, first against
gravity, secondly against the cen-
trifugal force of the oscillating pen-
dulum. Let the length of the thread
be altered slowly from I to l + Al; to
fix ideas we may suppose Al to be a
negative number, so that the pendulum
is shortened. The component of the
mng cos op
' 1g. 3. Simple pendulum of variable length. It th
ength is reduced slowly enough, the ratio of energ
to frequency is constant.
weight, which stretches the thread, is mg cosp, and the centrifugal
force is mid', where d is the angular velocity. The work done against
gravity and centrifugal force is
A =
(mg cos$ + mid?) (- dl).
We now assume that the shortening of the thread takes place extremely
slowly, so that during the process the pendulum oscillates to and fro
a great many times.
We can then disregard the variability of the
amplitude of the oscillation with the length of the thread, and integrate
over the motion on the supposition that the amplitude is constant.
We thus obtain
A = - (mg cos + mid?) Al,
where the bar indicates averaging over the undisturbed motion. If
further we confine ourselves to small amplitudes, we can replace
cos d by 1 - 4ª/2.
Thus
A =-mgAl+ (mg
2
The first term corresponds to the elevation of the position of equili-
brium, which does not interest us. The second part of the expression,
i.e. the product of Al by the expression in brackets, represents the
increase AW in the energy of the pendulum motion. Now the energy
of the undisturbed pendulum motion is


===== PDF PAGE 0125 =====

VI
QUANTUM CONDITIONS
I03
where the first term represents the kinetic energy, and the second the
potential energy relative to the position of rest. Replacing 1 - cos
by the approximation o/2, we get
But this is just the energy function for a linear oscillator with the
linear amplitude q = I. The motion is therefore a simple harmonic
vibration = do cosut, and we have therefore
6ª =
2'
from which, since w = 2mv = V(g/l), it follows easily that
• = mg $03
2'
while, from the second term in the last expression for A,
W
Hence we have
But on the other hand, since y varies as 1-*,
, we have
so that
AW
Ar
-
=
W
V
This is a differential equation for W as a function of the frequency v,
and its solution is
= const. = J.
Thus, during the slow (adiabatic) shortening of the pendulum, this
quantity J remains constant, so that without infringing Ehrenfest's
principle mentioned above, we can put it equal to an integral multiple
of h, i.e.
W = nhv.


===== PDF PAGE 0126 =====

+ ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
We thus obtain the energy levels of the harmonic oscillator, in agree-
ment with Planck's fundamental assumption.
The adiabatic invariants for other systems can be determined,
theoretically, in a similar way. Still, this direct method is in general
extremely troublesome, and one may well ask whether there is no
simpler method of discovering invariants.
We shall now show how
it is possible to do so by means of a
geometrical interpretation of the in-
variant quantity J = W/v, taking as
a special case our previous example
of the oscillator (simple pendulum
with small oscillations).
Fig. 4.—Phase paths for the linear oscillator; in the
replan the prasmultipte describes an ellipse, whose
We write down the energy once more, using a somewhat different
notation (9 = 1ф, p = mg, f = mg/l):
1
W=
-p?+
2m
In a pg-plane (fig. 1) this equation represents an ellipse with the semi-
axes
a = V(2mW), b = V(2W/f),
as we see at once by writing the equation in the form
2m W
- = 1.
The area of the ellipse is known to be
Prag = ab,
so that, in our case,
Podg = 2WV(m/f).
(The symbol d means that we have to integrate over a whole period,
i.e. bere, over the whole circumference of the ellipse.) But we have
2mv = V(f/m), so that
W
Фрад = - = J.
The adiabatic invariant is therefore simply the area of the ellipse,


===== PDF PAGE 0127 =====

QUANTUM CONDITIONS
I05
and the quantum postulate states that the area of the closed curve
described in the pg-plane (phase plane), in one period of the motion,
is an integral multiple of h (Debye, 1913).
The relation thus formulated is capable of immediate generalization.
Consider in the first place, as an example with one degree of freedom,
the case already treated above (p. 100), that of the rotator. Here the
co-ordinate is the azimuth q=b, to which belongs, as canonically
conjugated quantity, the angular momentum (or, in other words, the
moment of momentum) p. In the free rotation p is constant, i.e. inde-
pendent of the angle turned through. Thus
If we represent the motion in the pq-plane, this integral is to be taken
over the straight line p = const., not over a closed curve. But we
must observe that in this plane points with the same p,
whose g-co-ordinates differ by 2n, represent the same
state of the rotator. Properly speaking, therefore, we
should consider, not a pa-plane but a pq-cylinder (fig. 5)
of circumference 2n, so that the integral has now to be
taken over the circumference of the cylinder, and has the
Fig. 5.-Representation of the phase path of a rotator on a cylindrical surface.
value 2m. We therefore obtain J = mp. If we now assume the
correctness of our quantisation rule
J=Ordg =nh,
it follows that p =n(h/2m), the formula which we found before in
quite a different way for the hydrogen atom, and successfully applied
to the rigid rotator for the interpretation of band spectra.
It is found that the quantisation rule
Podg = nh
can be applied not only in systems with one degree of freedom, but
also in complicated systems with many degrees of freedom, and always
leads to results which agree with experience. The extension to more
than one degree of freedom depends (Sommerfeld, Wilson, 1916) on the
uch that the momenta asociated with them have the be introducet
P1 depends only on li, Pa On 12, and so on. Systems of this kind are


===== PDF PAGE 0128 =====

106 ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
said to be separable. In general, they are multiply periodic. In that
case the motion can be resolved into the superposition of simple
periodic vibrations and their harmonics (so-called Lissajous' figures).
As an example, consider the case of motion in a plane, where the rect-
angular co-ordinates x and
oscillate with two frequencies v1
and va (fig. 6). If vi were equal
to va, the path would be a circle,
an ellipse or a straight line, ac-
-a
ta
→ cording to the relation of the
phases. If the ratio of vi to va
Fig. 6.-Curve representing the motion of s
system with two degrees of freedom, in which
the two frequencies vy and va are incommensur-
able (Lissajous figure).
is a rational number, we again get closed orbits. If v and va are
incommensurable, ie. if their ratio is irrational, the curve does not
close, but gradually fills the whole rectangle within which the variables
range. For multiply periodic motions in general, the orbits are of this
type. If, however, an orbital curve closes after a finite number of
revolutions, there is in reality only one period, and there will be only
one quantum condition of the type
If the curve does not close, i.e. if two or more incommensurable periods
are present, then there will be as many quantum conditions as there
are periods:
This is the general case, also referred to as non-degenerate, whereas
the case of coincident or commensurable periods is called & case of
degeneracy. If u is the number of periods, o the number of degrees of
freedom, then w = v - u is called the degree of degeneracy. In Appendix
XIII (p. 283) we shall go into these relations a little more deeply.
As an example of the above rules we shall now give a discussion
of the hydrogen atom, the complete quantisation of which was carried
out by Sommerfeld. By Kepler's laws, the orbit of the electron round
the nucleus is an ellipse; it is therefore simply periodic. Since the


===== PDF PAGE 0129 =====

QUANTUM CONDITIONS
IO7
electron has three degrees of freedom, this is a case of double de-
generacy. In Appendix XIV (p. 286) we give the quantisation of the
Kepler ellipse, which leads to the correct energy levels (Balmer terms).
The degeneracy is partly
removed by taking into ac-
count the relativistic varia-
bility of mass, or dependence
of the mass of the electron
on its velocity. In this case
the orbit, according to Som-
merfeld, is given by a pre-
cessing ellipse (rosette); its
major axis revolves in the
plane of the ellipse round
Fig. 7.- Orbit (rosette) of the electron
about the nucleus, taking into account
the relativistic variability of mass; the
motion is doubly periodic, the peri-
helion being displaced by the angle
No per revolution.
the nucleus with constant angular velocity (fig. 7). The orbit is now
doubly periodic; besides the original period of revolution, which
remains unchanged if the precession is slight, we have now the period
of the precessional motion. In accordance with
this, we have here two quantum conditions:
(compare Appendix XIV, p. 286); n determines the
Fig. 8.-Elliptic orbit
semi-major axis a of the approximate ellipse, li its with the nucleus K as
focus.
similatus rectuation shows that he tote eular momentum is
p = hi
27'
and that the energy contains a term additional to the Balmer term:
R hZ°
- + e(n, hi).
From the first formula it follows that for l = 0 the angular momentum
vanishes; this gives the "pendulum orbits":
, in which the orbital
ellipse degenerates into a straight line. For k-n we obtain the


===== PDF PAGE 0130 =====

IO8 ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
greatest possible angular momentum for a fixed n; this gives the
circular orbits. For k <n we get the elliptic orbits.
In the spectra,
no sign has been found of the energy terms corresponding to the pen-
dulum orbits; the terms not being realized, the theory must delete
them from the term scheme. The reason given for their exclusion is
that the pendulum orbits pass through the nucleus, so that the electron
would collide with the nucleus, which of course is impossible.
The supplementary term e(n, k), the value of which will be given
later, expresses the minuter detail of the hydrogen lines; its effect
is to split up every Balmer term into a number of energy terms, corre-
sponding to the quantum number k. The special lines themselves are
therefore made up of a system of finer lines, which are determined by
the transitions between the energy levels of the upper state (n = ng,
k = 1, 2
,..., N1) and the lower state (N = n2, k = 1, 2, ..., nz).
This
is called the fine structure of the spectral lines.
Its theory was given by Sommerfeld for the case of
atoms of the hydrogen type (H, Het, Litt), and was
tested by Fowler and Paschen on the spectrum of singly
ionized helium (He+), which was found in complete
agreement with the theory. The test is casier with Het
than with H for this reason, that the energy terms of
Het are four times as far apart, on account of the
nuclear charge number Z being doubled, whereas the
Fig. 9.—Top-like motion of the normals to the plane of an orbit, in an ex-
ternal field; the normal moves in a cone as shown.
corresponding factor for the fine structure splitting, as the theory
shows, is 16; the fine structure of the lines of Het is therefore more
easily demonstrated and measured.
When the relativistic variability of mass is taken into consideration,
the degeneracy of the hydrogen atom is certainly removed in part,
but the motion is still simply degenerate. This degeneracy is con-
nected with the fact that in the absence of an external field the orbital
plane of the electron is fixed in space, and its orientation perfectly
arbitrary. The degeneracy is only removed by the introduction of an
external field. If the atom is brought into a homogeneous magnetic
field H, a motion of precession of the orbital plane sets in, round the
direction of the field (fig. 9). For the electron revolving in its orbital
plane gives the atom angular momentum and also magnetic moment;
considered as vectors, these are both at right angles to the orbital
plane. The magnetic field takes hold of the magnetic moment and


===== PDF PAGE 0131 =====

QUANTUM CONDITIONS
I09
seeks to turn it round into the field direction. The effort to do this
is opposed by the rotational inertia due to the revolution of the electron,
in a way known, sufficiently well for our purpose, from the theory of
the top; the efect, as in the case of the mechanical top, is precessional
motion.
This motion gives the third of the periodicities possible in the
hydrogen atom. In accordance with our rules, it is to be quantised
in the same way as the angular momentum of the orbital motion.
This leads to the formula
h
(m =-k, -k+1,
., +*).
2 т
Here P, is the component of the angular momentum p in the direction
of the field, so that this is quantised. Consequently the resultant
angular momentum, the magnitude p of which must
7-3
be an integral multiple of h/2m, can have only a finite
number of possible inclinations to the direction of H,
in fact 2k + 1 inclinations (fg. 10), corresponding
to the 2k + 1 possible values for its component pp
Fig. I0.-Example of quantisation of direction for the case k = 3; the
total angular momentum must be inclined at such an angle to the field direc-
tion that its projection m on that direction is a whole number (of units h/2m).
parallel to H. We speak of quantising of direction.
On the experi-
mental side, this quantising of direction can be demonstrated by the
experiments of Stern and Gerlach, of which we shall give an account
later (p. 167).
The precessional motion in the magnetic field contributes an
additional quantity of energy mu,h, where v,= eH/(Amuc) is the
so-called Larmor frequency, u being the mass of the electron. This
value for the energy is obtained as follows. The potential energy of a
magnet of moment M in a homogeneous magnetic field H, with which
it makes the angle 0, is equal to (-)HM cost. In our case the angle
O is defined by the quantising of direction: cos@ == p4/p = mh/(2mр).
On the other hand, & revolving charge (-e), which on account of its
mass u gives rise to an orbital angular momentum p, produces by the
rules of clectron theory a magnetic moment of (-ep)/(2uc). By com-
bining these results, we find for the additional energy the value stated.
Every term is thus split up into 2k + 1 terms by the magnetic
field. It is therefore to be expected that the spectral lines also possess
the property of splitting in the magnetic field. That this is actually


===== PDF PAGE 0132 =====

IIO
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP
so was found experimentally by Zeeman (1896), at a time when nothing
was yet known of quantum theory, and attempted explanations of
optical processes relied on classical mechanics. Zeeman's earliest
observations showed that the lines in question, when observed trans-
versally (magnetic field at right angles to the light path), are split up
into three, the middle line being polarized parallel to the fiekl, and
the outside lines at right angles to the field; but that, when they are
observed longitudinally (feld parallel to light path), they split into
two, which are circularly polarized in opposite directions. This case is
now called the normal Zeeman effect. It was shown by Lorentz that a
classical oscillator in a magnetic field may actually be experted to
show these phenomena. Suppose the linear vibration of the oscillator
resolved into two opposite circular motions at right angles to the field,
along with a linear motion parallel to the field; then, by the artion of
the field, according to Lorentz's theory, the frequency of one of the
circular motions is increased exactly by the Larmor frequency n
and that of the other circular motion is diminished by the same amount.
This agrees with the splitting and polarization observed in one direction
or another as described above.
2
т'
Fig. II.-Transitions in a magnetic field; on account of the
selection rule am = o, # 1, only the transitions indicated by
arrows occur; since the terms corresponding to the various
values of m are equally far apart in a homogeneous magnetic
- т
field, each spectral line splits up in the magnetic field into
three lines only (normal Zeeman effect).
It is now easy to see that our quantum theory leads to precisely
the same result. In spite of the splitting into 2li-+- 1 terms, we obtain
two, or three, component lines, according as we observe in the direction
of the magnetic field, or perpendicular to it. In the light of the corre-
spondence principle, this result can be understood at oner. For the
classical explanation of the Zeeman eflect given by Lorentz implies
that the atomic system, by the action of the magnetic tiekd, is given
an additional motion of rotation with the Larmor frequency ", that
is to say, an additional pure circular motion without harmonics. By
the correspondence principle this must also hold asymptotically for
the treatment by quantum theory; hence, as in the rotator, we are
led to the selection rules Am = I1. On the other hand, the com-
ponent of the motion parallel to the field is not changed in this pro-
cess; we therefore get the additional selection rule Am .. 0. For the
possible transitions we therefore obtain the scheme of fig. 11. The
splitting of the higher and lower terms is shown on horizontal lines,
and the arrows correspond to the possible transitions. The height of


===== PDF PAGE 0133 =====

QUANTUM CONDITIONS
III
the energy jump is the same for all the arrows directed obliquely
to the left, so that these yield one and the same radiated frequency;
similarly with the arrows pointing vertically downwards, or towards
the right. We therefore obtain a simple triplet (or doublet). Bohr's
theory gives only the normal Zeeman effect.
In reality (for not too
strong fields), the splitting pattern consists in general, not of three
lines only, but of a definitely greater number. This anomalous Zeeman
effect cannot be understood without going beyond the concepts we
have developed so far. We shall go into it more deeply in next chapter.
We pass now to the spectra of the alkali atoms (fig. 12, Plate VI).
They are considered to arise in this way: an electron, the so-called
radiating electron, moves in the field due to the nucleus and the rest
of the electrons, and by itself causes the spectrum. This view is
justified in the first place by the fact that in the alkalies, according
to experiment, one electron is much more loosely bound than the rest,
so that this electron is chiefly responsible for the chemical behaviour
of the alkalies; on the other hand, we shall find, in the discussion of
the periodic system in next chapter, that the remaining Z - 1 electrons
form so-called closed shells, round which the odd electron, ie. the
radiating electron, revolves.
The field in which it moves is centrally
symmetric, so that the potential depends only on the distance from
the nucleus; the Coulomb field of the nucleus is " screened" by the
remaining Z - 1 electrons, and it is just these deviations from the
Coulomb field which causes the differences between the spectra of the
alkalies and that of hydrogen.
Here also the radiating electron moves in a precessing ellipse; the
pure ellipse occurs as the form of the orbit in a pure Coulomb field
only, any deviation from which, such as that determined by the vari-
ability of mass in the hydrogen atom, implies precession. We quantise
this motion as before, and so obtain two quantum numbers n and k.
By general agreement the terms are denoted by a number and a letter.
The number indicates the principal quantum number n. For the
specification of the azimuthal quantum number k the following notation
has established itself:
k=1 2 31..,
sp df...
term.
Thus, c.g., 1d denotes the term with n = 4 and ki = 3. Since the
precessional motion is purely periodic, the correspondence principle
leads as before to the selection rule Ak = 1. The only transitions
which occur are therefore those from an s-term to a p-term, from a


===== PDF PAGE 0134 =====

II2
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
p-term to an s or d-term, and so on. For the sake of general distinc-
tion, the most important series of spectral lines have been given the
following names:
np → 1s principal series,
ns → 2p sharp series,
nd → 2p diffuse series,
nf → 3d fundamental series,
•
•
•
cope harp, difto an a fundma, al serior at sionaly called
series.) In this list, we have on
S
00
the left the terms between which
45-
-sd the transition takes place, in the
• 4тг.
35-
-4d
notation just explained; on the
- 3рг
-3d
right, the names of the series ob-
tained by giving different values to
2s-
n. In the term scheme (fig. 13) it
is to be understood that the energies
-2р
increase upwards. For every azi-
muthal quantum number k there
is a series of energy terms, which
correspond to the various values
1s-
of n, and which converge to a
Fig. 13. —Term scheme of sodium (with not certain value (the serics limit) when
too high resolution). The transitions between
the various levels give the emission lines.
n → co. The oblique lines represent
the possible transitions; those to
the Is-term correspond to the spectral lines of the principal series,
those from the s-series to the 2p-term to the spectral lines of the
sharp series, and so on. By the formation of such term schemes,
founded on theoretical considerations, it has become possible to intro-
duce order into the chaos of spectral lines as found experimentally.
As a last application of Bohr's theory we give a discussion of the
origin of X-ray spectra. The essential feature distinguishing X-ray
spectra from optical spectra is that the former are of the same type
in all elements (fig. 14, Plate VI), whereas the latter, though of like
structure for elements of like chemical character, are quite difterent
for elements belonging to different columns of the periodie table.
This means in the first place that X-ray spectra must have their source
in the interior of the atom, whereas for optical spectra, just as for
chemical behaviour, it is the outer region of atoms which matters.


===== PDF PAGE 0135 =====

PLATE VI
116-
Ni
3217
3102
3085
3992
Ch. V, Fig. ry. Rotating crystal photographs of the
for doments between arsenic (%.
rhenium (%
The figure shows the increase of
hardness with increasing atomic number.
('The marking
on the extreme loft is due to the undeflected primary
Ch. l, Pig. 12.
Emission spectrum of
potassium
rapour;
sodium line is shown
between the two upper-
most potassium lines.
1:008
lacing p. 112


===== PDF PAGE 0136 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0137 =====

QUANTUM CONDITIONS
IIZ
The lines found by experiment, which are denoted by Ka, Kg ...;
La, Lps..., Ma, Mgs.!., can be arranged in a term scheme, by
taking advantage of the difference relations
Rp = Kat Las
K, = Ra + 4p= Kp+ Ma, Sc.,
which correspond to Ritz's combination principle; these have been
tested experimentally with great exactness, and found to be fulfilled
as stated.
The interpretation of X-ray spectra was given by Kossel (1917). In
the atom the electrons are arranged in shells, there being a R shell, an
I shell, &c. The electrons are most firmly bound in the K shell, less
firmly in the I shell, still less firmly in the
N-
MI shell, and so on.. The energy levels
indicated by horizontal lines in fig. 15
correspond to the electrons in the indivi-
Lee 4o Ling
dual shells.
The excitation of a K-line,
according to Kossel, has to be pictured as
follows. By some process (collision, absorp-
tion of light) an electron of the K shell
Ka Ko K, Ko
is ejected from it. For this a definite
minimum energy is requisite; all amounts of
energy, which are greater than this least
Fig. I5.-Term scheme of X-ray
amount, can be absorbed. In absorption,
levels (after Kossel), with the transi-
tions corresponding to the X-ray
we therefore find in the spectrum a sharp
lines.
edge, the absorption edge;
wave-lengths
shorter than this are absorbed. Absorption lines, such as occur in
the visible region, are not found in the X-ray region.
If an electron has been ejected in this way from the K shell, an
electron of the I or M shell can fall down into the K shell, and a
quantum of radiation is emitted; in this case the lines Ka, Kg...
appear in the emission. A similar result follows in the case when the
excitation causes an electron to be expelled from the L shell.
From his measurements Moseley was able to deduce the following
law for the frequencies of the K,-lines of the various elements:
Here R, is the Rydberg constant, which we have already had before
us (p. 95); a is called the screening constant, and has approximately


===== PDF PAGE 0138 =====

II4
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
the same value 1-0 for all elements. The experimental facts, as stated
in Moseley's law, imply therefore that in X-ray spectra we are con-
cerned with terms of the hydrogen type (" hydrogen-like terms "),
with the nuclear charge screened off. This result is to be understood
in the sense that the innermost electrons, on account of the large
nuclear charge, are bound almost solely to the nucleus, and therefore
move in a similar way to the electron in the hydrogen atom, without
being essentially disturbed in their orbits by the rest of the electrons
60
KB1
50-
40
30
20
10
++1
18 11 12 13 14 1516 17 18 19 202122 23242526 2728 2930313233343536373839 4049424344454647484950.51 56:5334 55-565759596U
Ne Ma Si IS lA |Ca Ti |Cr Fe Ni Zn Ge Se Kr IST Zr M10 Ru Pd Gd Sn Te IXel Ba Ge Na
Na AL P CL A Sc Va MnCo Cu GaAs Br No Y
Nb
Rh Ay 1.2 So I
Cs La Pr
Fig. I6.-Diagram of points with abscissa equal to the atomic number Z, and ordinates
equal to the square roots of the frequencies of K-lines
in the atom. We therefore obtain a term scheme which corresponds
to that of the alkali atoms. We must in fact associate with the elec-
trons in the K shell the principal quantum number n = 1, with those
of the L shell n = 2, and so on.
Further, an exact investigation shows that the K-level is single,
the L-level triple, and the M-level quintuple, but the explanation of
this is postponed to next chapter.
Moseley's law puts at our disposal a simple method of testing the
order of succession in the periodic system. If we plot points in a dia-
gram, with abscissa Z, and with ordinate the square root of the fre-
quency of the Ka-lines, the points of the diagram, as determined by


===== PDF PAGE 0139 =====

V]
QUANTUM CONDITIONS
II 5
experiment, should lie on a straight line (fig. 16). If we gave an element
a wrong place in the periodic table, i.e. associated the element with a
wrong nuclear charge, then the corresponding point in the diagram would
lie off the straight line. In this way it could be proved once again
that, for instance, cobalt has a lower nuclear charge number (atomic
number) than nickel, in spite of its greater mass; examples of this class
are marked with a double arrow in the Table of p. 35. Another result
of Moseley's work was the final determination of the gaps in the periodic
table, i.e. of the elements which at that time were still unknown; in
particular, the existence of hafnium (Z = 72) could be predicted in
this way before its real discovery (Coster and von Hevesy, 1923).
We may mention further that Bohr in his theory of the structure
of the periodic system has substantially used only those simple pro-
perties which manifest themselves in the spectra of the alkalies and
of X-rays.
Here we conclude our account of Bohr's theory. Although it has
led to an enormous advance in our knowledge of the atom, and in
particular of the laws of line spectra, it involves many difficulties of
principle. At the very outset, the fundamental assumption of the
validity of Bohr's frequency condition amounts to a. direct and un-
explained contradiction of the laws of the classical theory. Again,
the purely formal quantisation rule, which stands at the head of the
theory, is a foreign element which in the first instance is absolutely
unintelligible from the physical point of view. We shall see later how
both of these difficulties are removed in a perfectly natural way in
wave mechanics.
Bohr's theory leaves some questions unexplained. Why must the
pendulum orbits be excluded? The reason given, which points to the
collision with the nucleus, is hardly cogent; moreover, it is outside
the bounds of Bohr's theory. How does the anomalous Zeeman effect
come about? The explanation of this, as we shall see (p. 140), requires
us to use the fact that the electron possesses in itself mechanical
angular momentum and magnetic moment. Finally, the calculation
of the simplest problem of the type involving more than one body,
viz. the helium problem, leads to difficulties, and to results contrary
to experimental facts.
3. Matrix Mechanics.
The main reason for the break-down of Bohr's theory, according
to Heisenberg (1925) is that it deals with quantities which entirely
elude observation. Thus, the theory speaks of the orbit and the velocity


===== PDF PAGE 0140 =====

ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
n electron round the nucleus, without regard to the consideration
we cannot determine the position of the electron in the atom at
without immediately breaking up the whole atom. In fact, in
order to define its position with any exactness within the atom (whose
diameter is of the order of magnitude of a few Angström units), we
must observe the atom with light of definitely smaller wave-length
than this, ie. we must irradiate it with extremely hard X-rays or with
y-rays; in that case, however, the Compton recoil of the eloctron is
so great that its connexion with the atom is immediately severed,
and the atom becomes ionized.
Thus, in Heisenberg's view, Bohr's theory fails because the funda-
mental ideas on which it is based (the orbit picture, the validity of
the classical laws of motion, and so on) can never be put to the test.
We move, therefore, in a region beyond experience, and ought not to
be surprised if the theory, constructed as it is on a foundation of hypo-
theses which cannot be proved experimentally, partially fails in those
deductions from it which can be subjected to the test of experiment.
If a logically consistent system of atomic mechanics is to be set
up, no entities may be introduced into the theory except such as are
physically observable not, say, the orbit of an electron, but only the
observable frequencies and intensities of the light emitted by the
atom. Starting from this requirement, Heisenberg was able to lay
down the leading principles of a theory, which was then developed by
himself, Born and Jordan (1925), the so-called matrix mechanics, which
is meant to replace the atomic mechanics of Bohr, and which in its
applications has been brilliantly successful throughout. Although in
form it is entirely different from the wave mechanics to be expounded
later, yet in content, as Schrödinger has shown, the two are identical.
On this account, and especially in view of the complete novelty
of the calculating technique, we do not consider matrix mechanies in
any detail, but content ourselves with some brief indications. If wo
start from the frequencies
En
Em
-
h'
as observable quantities, it is a natural suggestion that we arrange
them in square array as follows:
(VI1 = 0
V12
V13
• • •
V22 = 0
V23
V32
V33 = 0
•
•


===== PDF PAGE 0141 =====

MATRIX MECHANICS
IIT
If now we adhere to the arrangement in this scheme once for all,
so that, say, the place in the fourth row and the second column is
always associated with the transition from the fourth to the second
quantum state, then we can also set out in similar square array
the amplitudes anm of the " virtual resonators" associated with the
various frequencies emitted, where anm then denotes the intensity
of the frequency emitted:
(011
012
Q13
021
022
A23
032
0з3
•
Similarly we can insert in an array of this kind other quantitie:
nected with the transition n → m.
The question now is: how do we calculate with these arrays? I
the following remark of Heisenberg's is useful: if we multiply toget
two vibrational factors ani = eti'in and am = erikmt by the r
Antims then by Ritz's combination principle we get
which is a vibrational factor belonging to the same array, so that
by the method specified for forming a product, we merely pass to
another place in the square array, in conformity with the rule assign-
ing places. We can proceed to define the product of two such arrays,
in such a way that this product is again a square array of the same
type. The multiplication rule, which Heisenberg deduced solely from
experimental facts, runs:
(ann) (Orm) = (Lant lim).
It was remarked by Born and Jordan that this rule for multiplication
is identical with one which has long been known in mathematics as
the rule for forming the product of two " matrices"
, such as occur
in the theory of linear transformations and the theory of deter-
minants. We may therefore regard Heisenberg's square arrays as
infinite matrices, and calculate with them by the known rules of the
theory of matrices.
We now come to the central feature of matrix mechanics, which is
this, that a representative matrix of the above type is associated with
every physical magnitude. We can form a co-ordinate matrix, a
momentum matrix, and so on, and then calculate with these matrices
(E 908)
9


===== PDF PAGE 0142 =====

II8
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHap.
in practically the very same way as we are accustomed to do with
co-ordinates, momenta, and so on, in classical mechanics.
There is one essential distinction, however, between matrix and
classical mechanics, viz. that when matrices are introduced as co-
ordinates a and momenta p their product is not commutative; it
is no longer true, as it was in classical mechanics, that
11697 - 91021 = 0.
The non-commutativity which presents itself here is not, however,
of the most general kind, as the theory shows; for the left-hand expres-
sion, with a pair (%, Ix) of canonically conjugated variables, can take
only the definite value
h
P197 - 9xPk=
2 тг
These commutation laws (Born and Jordan, 1925) take here the place of
the quantum conditions in Bohr's theory. The considerations by which
their adoption is justified, as also the further development of matrix
mechanics as a formal calculus, are for brevity omitted here. In the
next section, however (§ 1, p. 121), it will be found that the analogous
commutation laws in wave mechanics are mere matters of course. In
Appendix XV (p. 291), taking the harmonic oscillator as an example,
we show how and why they lead to the right result.
It may be mentioned in conclusion that the fundamental idea
underlying Heisenberg's work has been worked out by Dirac in &
very original way.
4. Wave Mechanics.
Quite independently of the line of thought just explained, the
problem of atomic structure has been attacked with the help of
the ideas developed in the
preceding chapter. According to the
hypothesis of de Broglie (p. 79), to every corpuscle there corre-
sponds a wave, the wave-length of which, in the case of rectilinear
motion of the corpuscle, is connected with the momentum by the
relation
1= h
P
It is only consistent to try to extend the theory by applying this wave
idea to the atom, that is to say, to the electron revolving round the
nucleus; in that case we have to picture the atom as a wave motion


===== PDF PAGE 0143 =====

WAVE MECHANICS
III
round a particular point, the nucleus. What the theory has to do is to
deduce the law of this motion.
As the first step, following de Broglie, we shall show that the
quantum conditions of Bohr's theory can be inter-
preted at once on the basis of the wave picture. For
this purpose we consider the simple case of a circular
motion of the electron round a fixed point (fig. 17).
Fig. 17.-Motion in a circle from the corpuscular point of view; a
particle moves in a definite orbit with the momentum p.
On Bohr's theory we have for this motion of revolution the quantum
condition of angular momentum
where p is the linear momentum mu of the electron. Now imagine
a revolving wave instead of the revolving electron. If the radius of
the circular orbit is very great, the same relation will hold for the
revolving wave as for the plane wave, viz.
h
If we insert this value of the momentum in the preceding quantum
condition of angular momentum, we obtain the equation
nd = 2тr.
Here the term on the right represents the circumference of the circle:
the formula states that this must be equal to a whole
number of wave-lengths.
What then is the meaning of the quantum con-
dition of angular momentum? If we try to construct
lig. 18.--Motion of a wave in a circle; a single definite wave form is
only possible when the circumference of the circle is a
whole number
of times the wave-length.
a wave motion along the circular orbit with an arbitrary wave-length
X, and for this purpose mark the wave train along the circum-
ference (fig. 18), beginning at a point P with the "phase zero"
then in general after a complete round we shall arrive at P with
a phase differing from zero; after another round we again arrive with
a new phase, and so on.
We cannot uniquely associate a definite


===== PDF PAGE 0144 =====

I20
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
phase with every point. It is otherwise in the case when we choose
the wave-length so that
n\ = 2тr.
Here, in our construction, after a complete round we reach P again
with the same phase as we started with. In this case the wave picture,
or wave motion, is unique; a complete circuit changes nothing.
The quantum condition of angular momentum is therefore in this
example identical with the requirement that the wave function of
the corresponding vibratory process be one-valued. We therefore, as
a general method, replace the hitherto unintelligible quantum con-
dition of Bohr's theory by the obvious stipulation of uniqueness (and
finiteness) of the wave function for the whole domain of the indepen-
dent variables.
We pass now to the considerations which have led to the setting
up of a diferential equation-the wave equation- as the expression
of the law of the wave motion in an atom. That the fundamental law
takes the form of a differential equation is of course, by analogy with
other vibratory processes, only to be expected. There is, naturally,
no way of deducing the wave equation by strict logic; the formal
steps which lead to it are merely matters of clever guessing.
We begin with the motion of a free particle; we describe the associated
wave by a wave function
Here and t are the frequency and wave number; according to de
Broglie, they are connected with the energy and momentum by the
equations
v=
т =
=
h
By partial differentiation with respect to x and t we find
h as
-
= Ex.
2ті дх
2тi đt
We can now also read these equations in the converse way: the dif-
ferential equations being given, it is required to tind their solution.
In the case when the particle moves in a straight line, and all values
of x between — ∞ and + o are permissible, the solution is represented
by the function given above. It the particle moves along a circle of
circumference l, and we denote by x the co-ordinate of a point, viz.


===== PDF PAGE 0145 =====

V]
WAVE MECHANICS
I2I
its distance from a fixed point on the circumference measured along
the arc, then only values from 0 to 1 = 2mr are possible for x; for
increase of x by l brings us back to the same point. Since the value
of ‹ on the circle must be a single definite quantity, an increase of x
by l= 2mr must make no change in the function.
Now the general
solution of the first of the two equations above is i = Aezihpx,
which, when x is increased by l, is multiplied by enhp; hence, if
* is to be a "proper function"
, this factor must be equal to unity, i.e.
e(Rri)h)p1 = 1 = eRrin
or
nh
nh
- = n;
P=PR=T=
This signifies that the preceding equation, in the case of circular
motion, does not possess a permissible solution for all values of p,
but only for the discrete " proper values " 1h/l, 2h/l, 3h/, ... .
The foregoing equations can also be interpreted as follows.
When
the wave function & is known, we obtain the corresponding momentum,
or its x-component Pa, by differentiating the wave function partially
as to x: (h/2-) 04/Qx= Pals. To the x-component of the momentum
there belongs, as we say, the differential operator
h д
Р2 =
similarly for y and z. The operator belonging to the energy, on the
other hand, is
h d
E =-
2tri ot
Operators, or entities which operate on any function, that is, which
when applied to this function, generate another function, can be re-
presented in the most diverse ways. Heisenberg's matrices are simply
one definite kind of representation of such operators; another kind
is the set of differential coefficients corresponding to the momentum
components and the energy. In the latter kind of representation the
Born-Jordan commutation laws admit of a simple interpretation;
here, by what we have just wen, pg — Ip simply means the application
of the differential operator


===== PDF PAGE 0146 =====

I22
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
to the wave function i. But
04) =
2ті
2mri
Application of the operator pq - 9p is therefore identical with multi-
plication of i by h/2ri, or, in symbolical form, pg - 9P = h/2tri.
The formalism, which Schrödinger (1926) found suitable for the treat-
ment of the wave theory of the atom, consists of the following rule.
Write down the energy function H(p, 9) of the Hamiltonian theory as
an operator, by replacing p in it everywhere by (h/2mri)a/@g; the
operator corresponding to terms in p' is obtained by repetition, viz.
2ті бе
Еті да - 47 оді
The energy operator H
(Bri og' 9) is to be applied to a wave function a
Instead of the energy equation H(p, q) - E = 0, we obtain the dif-
ferential equation
h al
1*((m (mos) +
This is called Schrödinger's equation for the problem.
We have thus found the formalism, according to which any
mechanical problem can be treated. What we have to do is to find the
one-valued and finite solutions of the wave equation for the problem.
If in particular we wish to find the stationary solutions, i.e. those in
which the wave function consists of an amplitude function indepen-
dent of the time and a factor periodic in the time (standing vibrations),
we make the assumption that & involves the time only in the form of
the factor e (2rilh)Et. If we use this in Schrödinger's equation, we find
an equation in which the time does not appear, viz.
1(1n099) - 14=0.
We have now before us a typical "proper value" problem: we have
to find those values of the parameter E (the energy) for which this
differential equation possesses a solution which is one-valued and finite
in the whole domain of the variables (see Appendix XVIII, p. 300).
As an example of the method of forming the wave equation we take


===== PDF PAGE 0147 =====

WAVE MECHANICS
I23
first the harmonic oscillator. Its Hamiltonian function, already given
above (p. 104), 1s
# = 2m + 297.
From this, by the preceding rule, we obtain, as the Schrödinger equation
1h2 22
+ I
2 din= 0,
2т 4т= да
or, as the time-free equation of the stationary problem,
187m 0g + - 2) /4=0.
More important for us is the case of the hydrogen atom. Here the
Hamiltonian function is
e'Z
and the difterential equation derived from it is
h al
If we now introduce the usual differential symbol A for Laplace's
operator 03/0x2 + 23/0y + 22/02, and pass to the time-free equation
by putting
we obtain the wave equation
112
eZ\
-Д+ E+
18mm
4 = 0.
This is a wave equation in three-dimensional space, whose solutions
we shall investigate later. It may make matters easier for the reader
if we begin with corresponding problems in one and two dimensions;
and for the sake of perspicuity we shall take our examples from classical
mechanics (acoustics).
An example of this kind, in one dimension, is that of the vibrating
string. Its difterential equation follows from the theory of elasticity:
+ 14 = 0.


===== PDF PAGE 0148 =====

I24
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
Here 1 depends on the mechanical conditions (tension, thickness of
the string) and represents in effect the square of the frequency of
vibration. (It may be remarked that in classical vibrational processes
the proper value parameter always contains the square of the fre-
quency of vibration, while in wave-mechanical problems the proper
value parameter is given in general by the energy E = hv, and there-
fore contains the frequency in the first power.) The solutions of this
differential equation are
(COST Ax,
4(x) = a .
sin V Ax.
On account of the boundary conditions 4(0) = 0 and 4(L) = 0 (string
of length l with ends fixed) the cosine vibration drops out at once as
being inconsistent with the first condition. But even the sine vibration
is not a solution of the boundary value problem, unless WA is an
exact integral multiple of i, so that & vanishes when x=1. It is
only for definite values of ^ (the proper values) that we obtain possible
forms of vibration; these are given in fact by
2
4(0) = sin (no)
The vibration with n = 1 represents the fundamental, that with n = 2
the first harmonic (octave), and so on. In the
vibrational process, at definite points on the
string there are nodes, that is to say, points.
72-2-
which remain at rest throughout the vibration
72-31
rig. 19.— Vibrational forms of a string fixed at both ends. The
fundamental (n = 1), and the first two harmonics (n = 2 and n = 3).
(fig. 19). The number of nodes is determined by the parameter n, and
in fact is clearly equal to n — 1.
As an actual example of such a system with one degree of freedom,
in the quantum theory, we consider the harmonic oscillator, the wave
equation for which we have already given above (p. 123). Its solution
is dealt with in Appendix XVI (p. 295). Instead of Planck's energy
levels E = nhv, wave mechanics, exactly like matrix mechanics (see.
Appendix XV, p. 291), gives the energy terms
E = (n + 2)hv.
The ground state (i.e. as regards energy, the lowest state, n = 0) accord-
ingly possesses a finite energy E = hv/2 (zero-point energy). We shall


===== PDF PAGE 0149 =====

WAVE MECHANICS
I25
make use of this later (Chap. VIll, § 7, p. 255, App. XXXII, р. 343).
We next consider, as a two-dimensional example of a mechanical
vibration, the vibrating circular membrane, the differential equation
of which is
Ian?
+
* = 0.
Here also the proper value parameter 1 depends on the nature of the
plate and in effect represents the square of the frequency. The dif-
ferential equation can be easily solved in polar co-ordinates (Appendix
XVII, p. 297). In this case again we obtain possible forms of vibration
Fig. 20. Some vibrational forms of a cir-
n2-2
72=7
т=0
72-3
cular membrane fixed at the circumference; the
m=2
т=3
number of radial nodal lines is here (in dis-
agreement with the custom in wave mechanics)
called n, that of the azimuthal nodal lines m;
n and i are the " quantum numbers" of the
state of vibration.
for certain definite values of 1 only. Instead of nodes, we have here
nodal lines, of which indeed there are two kinds:
1. Lines for which v = const.; these are defined by the radial
ordinal number, or " quantum number", n = 1, 2, ... .
2. Lines for which d = const., corresponding to the azimuthal
ordinal number m = 0, 1, 2, . . •
Fig. 20 shows several examples. The signs + and — in the different
regions indicate that adjacent regions are always vibrating in opposite
phases.
The solution can also be obtained in polar co-ordinates for the
hydrogen atom, as a three-dimensional quantum problem; this is shown
in Appendix XVIII, p. 298). In this problem, it should be added,
we cannot speak of ordinary boundary conditions, since the domain
over which the independent variables range is the whole of three-
dimensional space. Instead of boundary conditions, we have now a
rule with regard to the behaviour of the wave function at infinity.
The natural condition to impose is that the wave function should
vanish at infinity " more strongly" than I/r. This follows from the
statistical interpretation of the square of the amplitude of the wave
function, as the probability of the electron being found at a definite
point of space. The condition is equivalent to this, that the electron
must always be at a finite distance.
Taking this "boundary condition" into account, we obtain
solutions of the wave equation which correspond to a bound electron


===== PDF PAGE 0150 =====

I26 ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
(elliptic orbit in the Bohr atom), only for definite discrete values of E.
In this way we find as proper values exactly the Balmer terms with
the correct Rydberg constant, E = - Rh/n'. Here n is the principal
quantum number. Besides this, the azimuthal quantum number
and the magnetic quantum number m also make their appearance.
The number of nodal surfaces i = const. isn - 1 - 1; for a given n,
l can therefore be any integer from 0 to n- 1; as for m, it can
take all values from -1 to +l.
When the relativistic correction for the mass is taken into account,
the energy depends on l also. Moreover, as follows from the form of
this dependence, l + 1 corresponds to the Bohr quantum number k,
so that our nomenclature for the terms (see § 2, p. 111) has now to be
understood as follows:
1=0 1 2
...
•s p d ...term.
In a magnetic field, E depends on m also, indeed the extra term
mu,h occurs as an addition to the energy, exactly as in Bohr's theory.
Wave mechanics, so far as we have developed it up to the present,
yields only the normal Zeeman effect (as above, § 2, p. 110). To the
directional quantisation of Bohr's theory there corresponds here the
finite number of values of m, i.e. of energy levels in the magnetic field;
there are in fact 21 + 1 of these, in place of each term which occurs
when there is no magnetic field. The splitting of the terms in an electric
field (Stark effect) is correctly reproduced by wave mechanics, quali-
tatively and quantitatively.
The states of the hydrogen atom, as considered so far, correspond
clearly to the elliptic orbits of the old Bohr theory; in both cases the
electron remains at a finite distance. But in Bohr's theory there are
also hyperbolic orbits; what corresponds to these in quantum me-
chanics? Clearly, solutions of the wave equation which do not disappear
at infinity. In order to obtain them we must give up the boundary
condition-vanishing of & at infinity-and look for solutions which
at a great distance from the nucleus behave approximately like plane
waves. In point of fact there are such solutions, and that for all
positive values of the energy. Physically interpreted, they describe
what happens when an electron coming from infinity passes near the
nucleus and is deflected by it. It can actually be proved that Ruther-
ford's scattering formula is strictly valid in wave mechanics also;
we shall return to this again (§ 6, p. 130; Appendix XX, p. 304).
Further, corresponding to the transitions between such states of posi-


===== PDF PAGE 0151 =====

V]
WAVE MECHANICS •
I27
tive energy and the quantum states of negative energy, we have now
the processes of emission and absorption of light, which form a con-
tinuous spectrum, and are particularly important for the purpose of
understanding the distribution of intensity in X-rays.
We add a few remarks on the wave mechanics of many-body prob-
lems. Here of course we are concerned with the solution of a wave
equation in many-dimensional space; thus the calculation of the
helium spectrum needs as many as six co-ordinates, and that of the
lithium spectrum nine. It is clear that in these cases an exact solution
is not to be looked for, so that we must be content with an approximate
solution of the problem. The methods of a highly developed pertur-
bation theory enable us to push this approximation as far as we please;
the labour involved, however, increases without limit with the order
of the approximation. The lowest terms of He, Lit and Li have already
been successfully calculated by this method, with results in good
agreement with experiment (Hylleraas, 1930).
Deductions which are quite exact can be made from any properties
of symmetry which the wave function must possess in virtue of the
symmetrical character of the problem. The most important of these
properties of symmetry is the one which is involved in the complete
equivalence of the electrons, and their consequent interchangeability;
the wave function must of course be the same, whether, say, the first
electron is situated in the K shell and the second in the L shell, or the
second in the K shell and the first in the L shell. This leads to general
rules for the tabulation of the terms in atoms with several radiating
electrons. Still, the results thus obtained are not immediately com-
parable with experiment, since in wave mechanics, so far as developed
above, an essential principle is lacking, which was discovered by
Pauli, and which will come before our notice in next chapter.
5. Angular Momentum (Moment of Momentum) in Wave Mechanics.
In Bohr's theory, angular momentum was of special importance
for the classification of the spectral lines and the systematic arrange-
ment of the terms;
it was found that it corresponded to a quantum
number k. This again led to the idea of the quantisation of direction,
the experimental confirmation of which by Stern and Gerlach's ex-
periment is perhaps the most impressive evidence we have of the
fundamental difference between classical and quantum mechanics.
The question is thus raised: how does wave mechanics deal with these
things? Is it capable of taking account of quantisation of direction in
a natural way?


===== PDF PAGE 0152 =====

I28
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
In wave mechanics, angular momentum, just like linear momentum,
has a differential operator corresponding to it, the components of the
operator being
_ —1
What is the significance of these operators? The electronic state is
given by the wave function i. In order to decide the question whether
definite values of the components of angular momentum round the
three co-ordinate axes belong to this state, we have to "apply" the
above operators, according to the rules of wave mechanics, to the
wave function 4; i.e. we perform the differentiations involved in the
operators. There are now two possibilities: either this operation
reproduces the wave function except for a constant factor, or it does
not. In the first case, the wave function is also at the same time a
proper function of the equation of angular momentum
and the state represented by the proper function therefore possesses
a definite angular momentum round the x-axis, whose value is given
by the "proper value" Me; here M. is an ordinary number (not,
like M. an operator). If, however, when we apply the operator Mx
to the wave function we obtain another function, which does not
agree with the wave function except for a constant factor, that is to
say, if i is not a proper function of the equation of angular momentum,
this means that the electronic state in question is not associated with
a fixed value of the angular momentum about this axis. In the case
of the proper functions given in Appendix XVIII (p. 298), by our
choice of the polar axis (z-axis) we have specially distinguished this
axis from the beginning.
According to Bohr's theory, the component
angular momentum round this axis must be quantised. Now wave
mechanics does in fact show that the proper values of the z-component
of the angular momentum are integral multiples of k/2m. Thus, on
introducing spherical polar co-ordinates
h a
Ma =
2 тті
— У бх)


===== PDF PAGE 0153 =====

VI ANGULAR MOMENTUM IN WAVE MECHANICS
I29
and on applying this operator to the proper function of the state
characterized by the quantum numbers n, l, m, we obtain at once on
account of the way in which d is involved (eimp)
4m =M 20
- Prims
so that the proper values of the component angular momentum M
are actually mh/2m. In the other two co-ordinate directions, in the
case before us, we may easily satisfy ourselves that we do not get
proper values, and therefore do not get definite values of Mx and M,.
On the other hand, the value of the resultant angular momentum for
an atom which can rotate freely (in the absence of an external field)
is in all circumstances quantised. For brevity we refer to Appendix
XIX (p. 302) for the requisite calculations, and give only the result
here: the square of the value of the resultant
is, according to wave mechanics, 41 + 1)(h/2m)?, not, as in Bohr's
theory, 7º(h/2m)?. This special feature is characteristic of the whole
wave mechanics of the atom, and in next chapter we shall often meet
it. Moreover, as we shall also see there, the splitting patterns of the
terms in the anomalous Zeeman eflect give direct confirmation of the
fact that the square of the angular momentum is actually equal to
1(6+- 1), and not to l. If, however, we disregard this difference, we
can apply in wave mechanics the representation of the angular momen-
tum by a vector diagram, known from Bohr's theory; we therefore
here also represent the total angular momentum by a vector l, with
regard to which we must note once for all that it has the absolute value
Vil+ 1). In the case when the z-direction is specially marked out,
say by the fact that an (extremely) weak magnetic field Il acts along
it, then the component in this direction of this vector angular momen-
tum is capable of integral values m only (in units h/2m), and this state
of matters continues to hold even in the limiting case H → O. Here,
and especially in next chapter, for the sake of greater perspicuity
we take over the vector representation of the angular momentum
precessing round the specially distinguished axis, and having a
component in the direction of the axis which can take only integral
values.
We expressly emphasize, however, that this idea cannot in this
way without more ado be brought into harmony with the conceptual
structure of wave mechanics. For the latter purpose, and particularly


===== PDF PAGE 0154 =====

I30
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
for the proof that two angular momenta may be compounded vec-
torially in wave mechanics in the same way as in Bohr's semi-classical
theory, higher mathematical methods are required, especially so-
called group theory. For this reason we cannot go further into these
questions at this point. It may be mentioned, however, that further
development has led to the electron being regarded, not as a particle,
defined by three space co-ordinates, but as a top-like structure, pos-
sessing an angular momentum of its own. This "spin" theory of the
electron will be dealt with later (Chap. VI, p. 136).
In conclusion, we have still to consider the meaning of the wave
function itself; so far, we have obtained it as a mere by-product, so
to speak, in the search for proper values. But in a vibrational process
knowledge of the amplitude is at least as important as knowledge of
the proper frequency; similarly, it is to be expected that in wave
mechanics great physical significance attaches to the wave function 4,
or rather, to the square of its modulus, since of course the instantaneous
value of the oscillating function itself cannot play any part, on account
of the high frequency. The reason for taking the square of the modulus
is that the wave function itself (because of the imaginary coefficient
of the time derivative in the differential equation) is a complex
quantity, while quantities susceptible of physical interpretation must
of course be purely real.
6. The Statistical Interpretation of Wave Mechanics.
We have already mentioned the interpretation of the wave func-
tion given by the author (p. 83). Let the proper function corre-
sponding to any state be te; then 41? do is the probability that the
electron (regarded as a corpuscle) is in the volume element do.
This interpretation is almost self-evident, if we consider, not the
quantum states proper (with discrete, negative energy-values), but
the states of positive energy, which correspond to the hyperbolic
orbits of Bohr's theory. We have then to solve a wave equation
where, instead of the Coulomb potential -e'Z/r, V(r) is written some-
what more generally, in order to take into account possible screen-
ing of the action of the nucleus by firmly bound electrons. For par-
ticles entering the atom with very high speeds, and therefore very
large energy E, V(r) will only come into consideration as a small


===== PDF PAGE 0155 =====

STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION
IZI
"disturbance", or "perturbation"; if we neglect it, we have as
a solution of
1872m
the plane wave i = e(zilhpa, where
E =
- 13
2m'
and the direction of the wave normal is assumed arbitrarily as parallel
to the z-axis. The disturbance can be taken into account to a first
approximation by substituting the plane wave expression for i in
the term V(r) in the original equation; we have then to find a solution
(Born, 1926) of
corresponding to a wave receding from the nucleus. It is perfectly
clear, especially in the light of the analogy with the scattering of light
waves, that the intensity of the secondary wave gives the number
of electrons, belonging to a given incident beam, which are deflected
in a definite direction; and this in effect implies the statistical inter-
pretation as stated. A more rigorous investigation will be found in
Appendix XX (p. 304); it is there shown how the intensity, i.c. the
number of particles in a stream, per square centimetre and per second,
is to be defined. In particular, if V(r) is chosen so as to correspond
to a (screened) Coulomb field, the result obtained is precisely Ruther-
ford's law of scattering (P. 53). As a matter of fact it is only for swift
particles that this proof is valid; but it can be shown (Gordon, Mott,
1928) that the result is strictly correct. The exact solution differs from
the approximate one only in terms which have no influence on the
stream-intensity. This is very remarkable, and is analogous to the
fact that, in the Coulomb field, the discrete term values, as given by
wave mechanics, are in agreement with the values calculated with
the help of quantised classical orbits.
If we extend this statistical interpretation to the case of discon-
tinuous states, and if l, is the energy and in the proper function of
such a state, then In do is the probability that an electron will
be found precisely in the volume element du; this holds in spite
of the fact that the experiment if carried out would destroy the
connexion with the atom altogether. The probability of finding the


===== PDF PAGE 0156 =====

I32 ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
electron somewhere or other in the atom must according to this inter-
pretation be equal to l; that is to say, the factor in the solution of the
(homogeneous) wave equation, which in the first instance is quite
indefinite, must be determined so that the equation
is satisfied. This "normalizing integral", which has no meaning
except in the domain of discontinuous energy values, plays a remark-
able part in this respect, that it does not vary with the time, even when
we do not confine ourselves to stationary states alone, but substitute
for & any solution at all of the wave equation, in the form containing
the time.
We speak frequently of a density distribution of the electrons in
the atom, or of an electronic cloud round the nucleus. By this we
mean the distribution of charge which is obtained when we multiply
the probability function In for a definite state by the charge e of
the electron. From the standpoint of the statistical interpretation its
meaning is clear; it can be represented pictorially in the way shown
in fig. 21, Plate VII. The figures represent the projections (sharlows)
of the electronic clouds in various states; the positions of the nodal
surfaces can be recognized in them at once.
From another point of view, the statistical interpretation of wave
functions suggests how the radiation emitted by the atom may be
calculated on wave-mechanical principles. In the classical theory this
radiation is determined by the electric dipole moment p of the atom,
or rather by its time-rate of variation. By the correspondence principle,
this connexion must continue to subsist in the wave mechanics. Now
the dipole moment p is easily calculated by wave mechanics; if we
adhere to the analogy with classical atomic mechanics, it is given by
where r stands for the radius vector from the nucleus to the point o
integration, or tield point. (As usual, the asterisk denotes replacemen
by the conjugate complex quantity.) The integral represents of cours
the position of the " electrical centroid of the electronic cloud "
• Now
as is easily proved, this integral vanishes for all states of an atom
so that the derivative of the dipole moment vanishes, and accordingl
the emitted radiation also; that is, a stationary state does not rachate
This gives an explanation of the fact-unintelligible from the stand
point of Bobr's theory-that an electron which is revolving about th


===== PDF PAGE 0157 =====

PLATE VII
IS m = 0
20 m=.
3d m =2
3d m= I
3d m = 0
4f m1== 3
4.f m = 2
4./ m=: I
+f m: = 0
25 011 : 0
30 I-I
Ch. V, Fig. ar.--The figures show graphically in the form of silhouettes the dis-
tribution of charge which, according to Schrödinger's theory, must exist in the electronic
cloud. The nodal surfaces corresponding to the quantum numbers stated can be clearly
seen, especially in the s-states, and in the states for which m is small.
Ch. VI, Fig. 2. Splitting patterns in a magnetic field. (e) Normal Lorente triplet for
the C'il line 0439 (the vibrations in the lower lines are perpondicular to the magnetic lines
of toree, those in the upper lines parallel to them. (b) Anomalous Zooman eflect for the
Nil D-lines (below without, above with magnetic field). (e) and (d) show Geoman eflects
for Cr lines (above, vibrations parallel to field; below, perpendicular to it).
E: 008
Facing p. 132


===== PDF PAGE 0158 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0159 =====

STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION
I33
nucleus, and according to the classical laws ought to emit radiation
of the same frequency as the revolution, can continue to revolve in
its orbit without radiating. In wave mechanics this absence of emitted
radiation is brought about by the fact that the elements of radiation,
emitted on the classical theory by the individual moving elements of
the electronic cloud, annul each other by interference.
But now, in analogy with the probability function or density
function In*In of a definite state, as defined above (p. 131), we can
form, in the first instance in a purely formal way, the "transition
density" Im*In corresponding to a transition from a staten to another
state m; it corresponds physically to the well-known "beat pheno-
mena", which occur when two vibrations with neighbouring fre-
quencies are superimposed on each other; its rhythm is given by the
time factor
e-(2mi/h)(En- Em)t
of the transition density, and the beat frequency is found from the
difference of the energies of the two states:
En -Em
Unm = -
h
We now form also, in an analogous way to this, the dipole moment
corresponding to the transition from n to m
It oscillates with the beat frequency given above, and therefore, by
the classical formula (Appendix VIII, p. 275), radiates per unit time
the energy
J=..
i am = 22)
(2 TV nm)*| Vrm?.
3c3
The quantity vum whose meaning follows from the formula for Pum
(splitting of the time factor), is called the matrix element of the vector
coordinate v; as Schrödinger has shown, it is identical with the matrix
element which, in Heisenberg's co-ordinate matrix, occupies the nth
row and the mth column (Appendix XV, p. 291).
Thus, according to wave mechanics, we obtain the emitted radiation
by calculating, in purely correspondence fashion, the radiation emitted
by an oscillating dipole, as obtained by the rules of classical electro-
dynamics. From this it follows automatically that in the spec-
trum only those lines can occur whose frequency agrees with a beat


===== PDF PAGE 0160 =====

I34
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND SPECTRAL LINES [CHAP.
requency between two states of the atom.
to explain which Bahr had to introduce, as a senate dental fat late
of his theory, the radiation condition
which is perfectly unintelligible from the classical standpoint. It is
not to be understood, however, that both states n and m are excited
simultaneously when emission occurs; it is rather a matter of their
virtual presence. In point of fact, in order that a spectral line may be
spontaneously emitted, the upper state must be excited in some way
or other; the emission is then a companion process to the jump to the
lower quantum state (vibration of an associated virtual resonator).
The intensity of the spectral line is the product of two factors, the
number of excited atoms and the radiating strength J of an individual
atom, which we have just calculated. Thus, with regard to the con-
ditions of excitation of lines, those ideas in Bohr's theory which are
brilliantly verified by experiment are just the ideas which are retained
in their entirety in the wave mechanics. The latter theory adds a
more exact calculation of the intensity J of the individual elementary
act, depending on evaluation of the integrals occurring in the matrix
elements, while on this question Bohr's theory could only with
difficulty make a few statements, with the help of very considerable
use of the correspondence principle.
As is shown in Appendix XXI (p. 308), the evaluation of the matrix
elements in the case of the hydrogen atom leads to the selection rules
A = I1 and Am = 0, II; that is, all matrix elements vanish
which do not correspond to one of the transitions mentioned, and
with them vanishes also the radiation of the corresponding frequencies.
Application of this to hydrogen-like atoms (such as the halogens)
gives the theoretical foundation for the facts that, for instance,
transitions occur between s and p terms or between p and d terms,
but not between s and d terms or between p and f terms.
Besides the discontinuous states there are also states forming a
continuous range (with positive energy); they correspond to the
hyperbolic orbits of Bohr's theory. The jumps from one hyperbola
to another or to a stationary state give rise to the emission of the
continuous X-ray spectrum emitted when electrons are scattered or
caught by nuclei.
The intensity of this spectrum has been cal-
culated by Kramers (1923) from the standpoint of Bohr's theory by
a very ingenious application of the correspondence principle.
His


===== PDF PAGE 0161 =====

V]
STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION
results can now be confirmed and improved by evaluating the matri
elements belonging to two states, one or both of which are in the
continuous range (Oppenheimer, 1926).
Further, the method just explained for the wave-mechanical
calculation of the radiation emitted can be put on a rigorous basis,
as has been shown by Dirac. For this purpose we must on the one
hand "quantise" the radiation field, and on the other hand take
fully into account the coupling, as given by electrodynamics, between
the radiation field and the atoms present in it. It is beyond our scope,
however, to take up these problems here.
refer mie ho the eva at point, anch that tae introduction of the
corpuscle concept is therefore only made possible by the artificial
importation of the statistical interpretation. As against that, it may
be remarked, while the matrix or "quantum mechanics" of Heisen-
berg, briefly outlined above, is in complete agreement with wave
mechanics in its content, and only differs from it in the form of presen-
tation, still in its methods it attaches itself rather to corpuscular
mechanics.
The true philosophical import of the statistical interpretation has
already been explained in § 7 (p. 82). It consists in the recognition
that the wave picture and the corpuscle picture are not mutually
exclusive, but are two complementary ways of considering the same
process--a process whose accessibility to intuitive apprehension is
never complete, but always subject to certain limitations given by
the principle of uncertainty. Here we have only one more important
point to mention. The uncertainty relations, which we have obtained
simply by contrasting with one another the descriptions of a process
in the language of waves and in that of corpuscles, may also be
rigorously deduced from the formalism of quantum mechanics-as
exact inequalities, indeed; for instance, between the co-ordinate q
and momentum p we have the relation
AgAP>
if Ag and Ap are defined as root-mean-squares (see Appendix XXII,
p. 312).


===== PDF PAGE 0162 =====

CHAPTER VI
Spin of the Electron and Pauli's Principle
1. Alkali Doublets and the Spinning Electron.
The great success of Bohr's theory and especially of wave mechanics
shows that in the interpretation of atomic processes we are on the
right road to knowledge. The theory, however, as we have repeatedly
eraphasized in the preceding chapter, is still incomplete. In particular,
explanations cannot yet be given of the anomalous
Zeeman eflect,
the synthesis of the shells in the atom, &c. The wave mechanics of
the atom, in its form as developed up to this point, still needs a far-
reaching extension by the introduction of new ideas and hypotheses,
which will form the subject of the present chapter.
The starting-point is given by the observation that the lines of
the principal series in the alkalies are double. A well-known example
is the D-line of sodium, whose doublet nature can be observed even
with simple spectroscopic appliances. The splitting of the line is rather
considerable- it amounts to 6 A.; the two components are denoted by
D and Da, their wave-lengths being 1 = 5896 A. for D,, and 1 = 5890
A. for Dy. The term analysis of the alkali spectra, to which the spectrum
of sodium belongs, gives the definite information about them that the
terms (6 = 0)
are simplo,
P-, do, ... terms (l = 1,2, ...) are double.
This experimental result cannot be explained either from the stand-
point of Bohr's theory, or from that of wave mechanics so far as
developed above. We have investigated above (p. 125) the most
general motion of an electron in the atom, on the basis of its three
degrees of freedom, and have arrived at the conclusion that the motion
is completely determined and described by the three quantum numbers
n, 1, m. Any further splitting of the energy terms than that con-
ditioned by these quantum numbers is therefore unintelligible, so
136


===== PDF PAGE 0163 =====

CHAP. VI] ALKALI DOUBLETS: SPINNING ELECTRON I37
long as we adhere to the idea that the motion of the electron is at most
triply periodic.
Under the compulsion of experiment, Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit
(1925) put forward the following bold hypothesis. Previously the elec-
tron was regarded as an unextended structure, possessing only three
degrees of freedom and, moreover, determined by two constants, viz.
its charge e and its mass m. If, however, the electron is regarded as
a structure with finite extension, then, like every extended system, it
possesses three rotational degrees of freedom besides its three trans-
lational freedoms. It is therefore an obvious suggestion to ascribe to
the electron angular momentum about an arbitrary axis (also fre-
quently called " mechanical moment "). Developing the idea further,
we must assume that the electron also possesses magnetic moment;
for the electron carries an electric charge e, which rotates convectively,
about the axis mentioned, along with the electron; so that the rotat-
ing electron is equivalent magnetically to a system of circular currents
round the axis of rotation, and these, as we know, give rise to a mag-
netic moment. With regard to the magnitude of the magnetic and the
mechanical moments, experiment must of course decide in the first
instance; afterwards, we can try to deduce these magnitudes theoreti-
cally.
This property of the electron, in virtue of which it has a mechanical
and a magnetic moment, is called its spin.
The magnitude of the mechanical moment follows immediately
from known facts about the spectra of the alkalies. The angular
momentum of the electron must of course, like every angular momen-
tum, be quantised, and the same holds good for its component in a
specially distinguished direction (external magnetic field). If then
the value of the mechanical spin-moment is s (in units h/2m), there
must, by the rules for the quantisation of direction, be 2s + 1 possible
"settings" (i.e. orientations or inclinations) with respect to the special
direction; the individual components of s, which we call o, differing
from each other by successive units. To see this, consider the analo-
gous relations in the Bohr atom, in which the plane of an orbit with
angular momentum l has precisely 2l+1 possible settings with
respect to the special direction, these settings being characterized by
the components m of l in that direction (see fig. 10, p. 109). This exten-
sion of the concept of orbital angular momentum to spin angular
momentum is justified by the fact that the consequences deduced
from it are found to be in full accord with the facts. As regards this
point, we may refer here once again to what was said in § 5, p. 127,


===== PDF PAGE 0164 =====

138
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
about the applicability of the classical vector-model to the description
of atomic states in wave mechanics. In this chapter we shall be
concerned almost exclusively with the conceptual scheme, and shall
therefore use the pictorial vector-model, postponing the wave-
mechanical treatment of the spinning electron until the close of the
chapter (§ 8, p. 169).
As has just been brought out, the spin-moments of the electron
must have 2s + 1 possible settings with respect to a specially dis-
tinguished direction. Now experiment shows that the
0-1
5-%
terms of sodium, excepting the s-terms, are double. This
Fig. I.-Setting of the spin with respect to a specially distinguished direction;
there are two possible settings, parallel and antiparallel to this direction.
compels the conclusion that the spin-moment has only two possible
settings (fig. I), unless we are altogether wrong in assuming that
this term-splitting is determined by the spin. Hence we must have
2s + 1 = 2, or
(in units h/2). The two possible settings have then the components
0 = 0=
The occurrence of half-integers here as "quantum numbers" contra-
dicts, at first sight, our ideas regarding the quantisation of angular
momenta. It is to be noted, however, that the hypothesis we have
used above of a rotating electron, extended in space, possesses merely
heuristic value; we must be prepared, on following out these ideas,
to encounter difficulties. (For instance, a point at the surface of the
electron would have to move with a velocity greater than that of
light, if such values as have been determined experimentally for
angular momentum and magnetic moment are to agree with those
calculated by the classical theory.) The use of half-integral com-
ponents of angular momentum for the spin consistently leads, however,
to results which are in complete agreement with the experimental
facts. On the other hand, the wave mechanics of the spinning electron,
in the form given to it by Dirac, leads automatically to this half-
integral property, merely as a consequence of the conditions of linearity
and relativistic invariance, without any subsidiary assumption.
An electron revolving about the nucleus possesses an orbital
moment l; besides this, it has the mechanical spin-moment s. The
question arises: how are these two moments to be compounded with


===== PDF PAGE 0165 =====

VI] ALKALI DOUBLETS: SPINNING ELECTRON
I39
each other? Bohr's theory would reply that they must be combined
by the method of vector addition. This same rule for the composition
lanet, v. de goon, goon, re to ave vachanins, althote the proof
(group theory). They therefore combine vectorially, giving a resultant
(or total) moment j (in units h/2m), so that
j=b+s.
After Sommerfeld, j is called the "inner" quantum number; it repre-
sents the total mechanical moment of the atom. It too must of course
be quantised. Since s = ½, there are only the two possibilities,
jis therefore half-integral in this case. For each I-value there are
accordingly two possible values for the total mechanical moment,
so that the corresponding terms are double. The s-terms alone (I = 0)
form an exception; they are always single, for in this case the only
allowable value is j=s = ½, since j, the total angular momentum,
must always be positive. The double possibility for the setting of the
spin with respect to the orbit is equivalent to a splitting of the energy
terms, on account of the magnetic coupling of spin and orbit. The
magnitude of the splitting is in fact given directly by the energy
which is noeded in order to turn the spin round, from one setting
relative to l in the magnetic field of the orbit, into the other setting
We take as an example the case with which we began (p. 136), that
of the sodium D-lines. The terin analysis shows that the upper state
is a p-term, while the lower is an s-term. The former is double, corre-
sponding to the two possible values of the total angular momentum
j= ½ and j= ⅔; the lower term, being an s-term, is single (j = ½).
The D, line corresponds to the trunsition from the p-term with tho
inner quantum number j= the D, line to the transition from the
term with j. 3
The rule of vector addition can also be applied to the case of several
electrons; in this case the orbital moments ly, lg... of the individual
electrons, and their spin-moments sy, sy..., are compounded so as to
give the total angular momentum j. Here j is integral or half-integral
according as the number of electrons is even or odd. Similarly, the
projection m of j on a specially distinguished direction can also be
either integral or half-integral.
In conclusion, we may also recall the fact that the whole vector


===== PDF PAGE 0166 =====

I40
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHaP.
figure of mechanical moments rotates round the direction of j, with
uniform angular velocity; as follows from the meaning of j, the total
angular momentum. This implies, as we have fully explained in the
preceding chapter (p. 101), that the emitted radiation is subject to the
rules Aj= #1. In addition, however, as the theory agrees with
experiment in showing, there are transitions with Aj=0; these
correspond to changes of state in which the total angular momentum
does not change. The fact that these transitions are permitted, while
those with Al= 0 (or Ak = 0, see foot of p. 111) are forbidden, is
capable of explanation on correspondence principles. We shall not,
however, consider the matter more closely.
2. The Anomalous Zeeman Effect.
It has been shown in the last section, and will further appear in
succeeding sections, that the hypothesis of the "spinning electron" has
made it possible to understand the splitting of terms (multiplets), a
phenomenon which the orbital picture by itself was quite incapable
of explaining. The phenomenon in fact depends upon the possession
of angular momentum by the electron itself; this internal angular
momentum, by the quantum rules, can be directed in different ways
with respect to the direction of the orbital moment, or with respect to
a direction marked out by external means.
We shall now show that the electron's own magnetic moment,
which is bound up with its mechanical moment, supplies the explana-
tion of the anomalous Zeeman effect, ie. the observed phenomenon
that in a (weak) magnetic field a spectral line is split up into a con-
siderable number of lines (fig. 2, Plate VII); while, according to
classical theory, and also according to wave mechanics when spin is
not taken into account, we can only have the normal Zeeman effect,
i.e. the splitting up of every spectral line into a Lorentz triplet.
We may briefly recall the explanation of the normal Zeeman
effect. The revolution of the electron produces a mechanical moment
P, of the orbital motion, and this is quantised by known rules:
h
P, = 1.
On the other hand, the revolving electron acts like a circular current
of strength I = e(w/2), where w is the frequency of revolution, and
so generates a magnetic field. But the magnetic field of a circular
current I is, as we know, equivalent to that of a magnetic dipole of
moment 1 = Al/c, where A is the area enclosed by the circuit, and


===== PDF PAGE 0167 =====

VI]
THE ANOMALOUS ZEEMAN EFFECT
I4I
c is the velocity of light. Hence the revolving electron behaves mag-
netically like a magnetic dipole of moment my?(e/c)w/2T; since, how-
ever,
the orbital angular momentum is pr=urw = (h/2m), the
magnetic moment IM, of the orbital motion becomes
M, = -
The value eh (Auc) therefore represents the smallest unit for the
magnitude of a magnetic orbital moment in the atom; it is called the
Bohr magneton.
eles, bol monto a til fut i direction the ato a it sa into
been explained above (p. 109); consequently the com-
ponent m of l in this direction must be a whole number
(quantisation of direction). As for the supplementary
the mine nee hen he in it on voyee the the one
Zeeman effect).
energy, by which the energy of the atom is increased owing to the
magnetic field, this is given by
Enagn = -M,H cos 0,
where d is the angle between the magnetic field and the direction of
the magnetic moment, i.e. the direction of I. But cost is obviously
equal to m/l, so that
eh
E magn = - Hm.
Атис
The terms therefore split up in the magnetic field, the separation being
eh
where
which is the same as the Larmor frequency already introduced (p. 109),
ie. the amount by which the frequency of a vibrating electrical system
is changed in a magnetic field, according to the classical theory.
Thus every term splits up into 21 + 1 equidistant terms, corre-
sponding to the 2l + 1 setting possibilities.


===== PDF PAGE 0168 =====

I42
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
however, every line should be split up into only three components, since
the precessional motion is purely periodic, and therefore the selection
rules Am = 0, I1 come into play. In this way, therefore, we get only
the normal Zeeman effect (see fig. 11, p. 110).
Even taking the spin of the electron into account, nothing in these
relations would be changed, if we associated with the electron a mag-
netic moment, bearing to the mechanical spin-moment Ps = s(h/2mr)
the same ratio as the magnetic orbital moment does to the mechanical,
i.e. if
M, =
M. =
Ps
2uc
For the total angular momentum would then be j, and the total mag-
netic moment would be IM, = (eh/truc)j; thus j and M; would have
the same direction, and would set themselves in the magnetic field
in accordance with the quantisation of direction, or precess round the
field direction in common. The single difference, with spin, would
be that now, not 21 + 1, but 2j+ 1 setting possibilities exist, and
that therefore every undisturbed term is split up by the magnetic
field into 2j+ 1 terms, but in such a way that the amount of the
splitting would be exactly the same as before; in the spectrum there
would be no difference at all.
The anomalous Zeeman effect, however, can be explained com-
pletely by assuming that the magnetic spin-moment is got from the
mechanical, not by multiplying by e/Zuc, as with orbital moments,
but by multiplying by e/uc, so that
eh
M, = 2-
— S.
Апис
Since the mechanical spin-moment is always s = ½, it follows that the
magnetic moment of the electron is exactly equal to a Bohr magneton
eh/Amuc. This difference in the behaviour of the spin-moments as
compared with the orbital moments can be put on a theoretical basis,
as has been first shown by Thomas (1926), and recently in a much
simpler way by Kramers (1935); it is a necessary consequence of the
theory of relativity. Morcover, the connexion between mechanical
and spin-moment, in the form we are now considering, follows rigor-
ously from the relativistic equation of Dirac.
It is just this difference between the orbital and the spin-moments
which is responsible for the anomalous Zeeman eflect. The result of
it is that the vector sum of the magnetic moments, ie. the total mag-
netic moment M, is not in general in the same direction as the total


===== PDF PAGE 0169 =====

VI]
THE ANOMALOUS ZEEMAN EFFECT
I43
mechanical moment j. In fig. 4 this is shown for the case of one elec-
tron, but the principle is the same for the case of several electrons
also. For clearness, the magnetic
orbital moment M, is shown twice
as large as the mechanical orbital
moment i; hence, by the preceding,
the magnetic spin-moment M, must
Fig. 4.- Vector
model for the anomalous
Zeeman
effect.
The
direction
of
the
total
ML
angular momentum does not coincide with the
direction
of the resultant magnetic
moment;
only the component My parallel to j is magneti-
cally
effective;
the other component MI
dis-
appears when averaged, on account of the rota-
tion
of the vector
figure about j (the total
angular momentum).
Ms
be shown four times as large as the mechanical spin-moment s. The
resultants M and j therefore fall in different directions.
In accordunce with the meaning of j, the total angular momentum,
we must regard the atom, and with it the whole vector figure, as in
rotation about the direction given by j; iny vector, not in this direc-
tion, therefore precesses round it. On account of the high frequency
of the precessional motion (it can be shown that the hy corresponding
to this frequency is of the order of magnitude of the " fine structure
splitting" of the terms, which is determined by the coupling of l and
s to the vector i; or, in the case, say, of the sodium D-lines, of the
order of magnitude of the splitting of the p-terms, ie. approximately,
• ~5 × 101 am.-4) only time-averages can come into question, for
magnitudes which vary slowly as compared with this frequeney. Thus,
for example, the atom will behave magnetically, in the presence of
an external fiekd, as if the atom had the magnetic moment M, where
the bar indicates a time-average. But the time-average of Ml is equal
to the projection of 1l on the axis of rotation, ie. equal to the com-
ponent A,; the component A perpendicular to the axis disappears
on formation of the time average.
In the presence of a (weak) external field the atom therefore
possesses an ofective magnetic momont. M, in the direction of j. On
account of the angular momentum it precesses about the direction of
the field, and the same considerations now hold as those adduced
above: ¿ possesses, in consequence of this precessional motion, only
2j + 1 possible settings with respect to the field direction, these being
characterized by the component m of j in this direction. The mag-
netic energies of these settings are given individually by —M,Em/j;


===== PDF PAGE 0170 =====

I44
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
the undisturbed term is therefore split up by the magnetic field into
2j + 1 terms with the separation M, H/j.
The difference now, as compared with the earlier case, is that
formerly (in the normal Zeeman eftect) the magnetic moment was
equal for all terms to the Bohr magneton multiplied by the quantum
number of the total angular momentum; the splitting was the same
for all terms, irrespective of their quantum numbers, being equal to
the Bohr magneton multiplied by the field strength Fl. When, how-
ever, the spin and the vector composition of the moments are taken
into consideration, we obtain an "effective" magnetic moment of
the atom, which in general is not given by the product of Bohr mag-
neton and total angular momentum, but depends also on the rest of
the quantum numbers and in particular on the angles occurring in
the vector figure. If we write, purely formally in the first instance,
eh
M,, =
- 39,
Аттис
then the factor g gives the divergencies which occur in our vector
model, as compared with the theory of the normal Zeeman effect.
The additional magnetic energy is then given by
Emagn = - 1/H
→ =-
Hmg = — hv_mg,
Атмс
where, as above, v, is the classical Larmor frequency. The undis-
+ 1
+2
т'
turbed term is therefore split up in the
magnetic field, certainly again into
Fig. 5.- Transitions in the anomalous Zceman effect;
since the splitting is different in the various term groups,
we get in general just as many separated lines as there are
-3
-2
+1
+2
+3
possible transitions altogether.
2j+ 1 equidistant terms, but the amount of the splitting hung is
not equal to that in the normal Zeeman eflect, viz. hv., but differs
from it by the factor g, which is called, after its discoverer, the Landé
splitting factor (1923). It varies from term to term, and is thus the
determining cause of the anomalous behaviour of the atom in the Zeeman
effect. The splitting pattern is not the Lorentz triplet; many more
lines occur, in
accordance with the fact that the energy differences
corresponding to the selection rules Am = -1, O, 1 are not now,
as they are in the normal Zeeman effect, the same for all values of
m (fig. 5).


===== PDF PAGE 0171 =====

VI]
THE ANOMALOUS ZEEMAN EFFECT
I45
The splitting up of a line in the anomalous Zeeman effect is there-.
fore essentially determined by the Landé factors for the upper and lower
states.
These factors, as will now be shown, can be
ascertained with comparative ease from the develop-
ments already given with regard to the vector model.
For this purpose we have to calculate the value of
((S))
Fig. 6.—Vector composition of the orbital moment I and the spin-moment
s, giving the total angular momentum j.
the component M, of the magnetic moment.
From fig. 6 we can
at once read off the relation
M, = M, COS (L, j) + Ms Cos (s, j).
If we now substitute for M, the expression used above, (eh/Amuc)jg,
and for the magnetic moments of the orbit and the spin, the values
already obtained, we find (note the factor 2 in the spin term!)
ch
- іg =
Ario (0016 1)+-28-60818 3))
Апис
which gives
2s
cos (1, i) +
cos (s, )).
The values of the cosines appearing in this equation may be written
down at once from the triangle of the vectors l, s and j (fig. 6):
Cos (5, 3) = 83+53-72
cos (l, 1) =
2jl
2js
For the Lande splitting factor we thus obtain
131-6-53
++299483-23
9 =*
2j2
2j°
=1+5+83 -19
-.
We have deduced this formula in accordance with the classical vector
model representation. In quantum mechanics this representation is
certainly still permissible, but with this difference, that the square of
the magnitude of an angular momentum, with the quantum number i,
is not equal to 7º as in Bohr's theory, but is given by (7 + 1). This is
proved in Appendix XIX (p. 302) for the orbital angular momentum;


===== PDF PAGE 0172 =====

I46
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
the same holds good for the spin angular momentum, so that we
can adapt the formula for the splitting factor to wave mechanics,
by writing everywhere ji + 1), (L + 1), s(s + 1), instead of j3, 13, s?:
9=1+18+1) +8(8+1) - 46+1)
Zj(j+1)
_ 8(8 + 1) - 46+ 1)
==+
This method of deducing the g-formula may seem rather unconvincing,
since classical ideas are applied throughout, and it is only at the very
end, as it were, that corrections from wave mechanics are brought to
bear. It may be mentioned, however, that the formula can also be
obtained from wave mechanics directly, though only, it is true, with
the assistance of group theory.
An immediate proof of the correctness of the formula is given,
however, by experiment. In Appendix XXIII (p. 318) the splitting
pattern in the anomalous Zeeman effect is calculated for the D-lines
of sodium. Even in this simple example-an atom with one radiating
electron—it can be seen how complicated, comparatively, is this
splitting pattern in the anomalous Zeeman effect. Experiment, how-
ever, has fully confirmed the correctness of the calculated pattern,
with complete spectroscopic accuracy. In every case in which the
anomalous Zeeman eftect has been investigated experimentally, theory
and experiment have been found to be in complete agreement. Con-
sidering the enormous numerical material which has been collected
up to the present time, and which the calculation of Landé's factors
has invariably proved capable of explaining, one is compelled to con-
clude without going further that the theoretical interpretation of the
anomalous Zeeman efect, and the results which it involves with re-
spect to the magnitude of the mechanical and magnetic spin-moments,
represent the actual truth.
In conclusion, we shall say something about one more phenomenon
observed in the Zeeman effect; this is called, after its discoverers, the
Paschen-Back effect (1921). We have stipulated above that the magnetic
feld is not to be too strong. This stipulation was tacitly used when
we replaced the magnetic moment by its time-average M = M This
is justified so long as the rotation of the whole vector model about
the direction of the angular momentum j is much more rapid than its
precessional motion about the direction of the magnetic field, the
frequency of which is, approximately, vy =1-40 X 106 I sec.-.


===== PDF PAGE 0173 =====

VI]
THE ANOMALOUS ZEEMAN EFFECT
I47
For the former, in the case of the splitting of the sodium terms, we
found (p. 136) A1 ~ 6 Á., corresponding to Av ~5 X 1011 sec.-1, so that
the required condition is certainly fulfilled in this example, for fields
up to some thousand gauss.
If, however, we increase the magnetic field strength until the two
frequencies are of the same order of magnitude, the foregoing con-
siderations are no longer valid, since it is then not the time-average
of M, but M itself, that is in question.
We are now in the region of
the Paschen-Back effect. We can describe it in another way by saying
that the internal energy of precession about j becomes comparable
with the external energy of precession of j about H, so that the fine
structure splitting depending on the spin is of the same order of mag-
nitude as the splitting of the terms in the magnetic field. If the
magnetic field strength is raised further still, so that the energies
depending on the setting in the field become much
greater than the energy of coupling between the orbital
moment l and the spin-moment s, we obtain the normal
Zeeman effect; in fact, this coupling is then practically
completely annulled, and the orbital and spin-moments
Fig. 7.—Vector model for the Paschen-Back effect (transition to the normal
Zeeman
effect).
of the orbital moment and spin-moment
in the magnetic field is greater than the magnetic interaction between orbit and
spin, the orbital and spin-moments precess separately round the field direction.
precess independently round the direction of H (fig. 7). The total
magnetic energy is then given by
Ramen - T 1/100 (7) +- 2908(921).
If we continue to denote by m, (a whole number) the projection of l
on the field direction, and observe that in this case the spin can only
set itself parallel or antiparallel to the field (o = ⅖), it follows from
the above equation and the half-integral character of the spin-moment
that
eh
Emagn = -
H (m, ‡ 1).
Апис
We therefore in this case obtain a term-splitting with the term-
separation corresponding to the normal Zeeman effect. Thus when
the magnetic field is steadily increased, a gradual transition takes
place from the anomalous to the normal Zeeman effect; the transitional
zone is referred to as that of the Paschen-Back effect. The nomen-


===== PDF PAGE 0174 =====

I48
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
clature, it may be noted, is not appropriate normally (at ordinary
field strengths) we get the "anomalous" Zeeman effect, while the
"normal" effect is only got at abnormally high field strengths.
3. The Hydrogen Atom and X-ray Terms.
We shall now investigate the question of how the statements of
the atomic theory with regard to the values of the terms are to be
corrected in the light of the recognition of the existence of spin. We
begin with the simple example of the hydrogen atom, and with the
schemes of terms which may be called hydrogen-like (alkali terms,
X-ray terms). In Chapter V (pp. 112, 126) we discussed the values of
Notation for
Terals
Taray
PS : DS :8S,
-
2
3d&1s
Bd12
n=3<
3p 3/2
La. LB
Lộ Lop
1
2p:/2
Litt
n=2l
2D112
55
2=1 VY YV
Fig. 8.—Diagrammatic synopsis of the notation for the various terms
und lines in alkaline and X-ray spectra.
these terms fully, on the basis of Bohr's theory and wave mechanics,
without taking into account the spin of the electron. We may state the
results once more, in brief summary. The hydrogen-like spectra arise
when an electron moves in a Coulomb field (hydrogen terms) or in
a Coulomb-like central field (screening by the rest of the clectrons;
alkali and X-ray terms). The value of the term depends mainly
on the principal quantum number: Balmer terms - Rh/n°
. If the
field deviates from the Coulomb field a correction has to be applied,
which depends not only on n but also on the azimuthal quantum
number l; it was denoted above (p. 107) by e(n, k), where k= l+1.
A similar correction is required if we take into account the relativistic
variability of mass, the influence of which on the hydrogen terms
has been mentioned above (p. 107).
The existence of electronic spin leads to a further correction of


===== PDF PAGE 0175 =====

VI]
HYDROGEN ATOM AND X-RAY TERMS
I49
the terms, since it gives rise to an additional determining number
j=1½. This additional number, as we have explained in § 1, p. 139,
causes a splitting up of the terms into doublets; but the s-terms,
and these alone, remain single, for in this case j can have only one
value, viz. 2. Instead of the scheme of terms in fig. 13, p. 112, we there-
fore obtain the scheme of fig. 8. The terms fall in the first place
into widely separated groups corresponding to the principal quantum
number n (n = 1, 2, 3, ...). The figure is not at all correct in its pro-
portions;
in reality the distance between two groups of terms, with
different quantum numbers, is 103 to It times greater than the
splitting within such a group; the transitions between two different
groups of terms correspond in the optical spectra to wave-lengths of
a few thousand A., while the fine structure splitting of the lines amounts
at most to a few
Within the group of terms with the same principal quantum
number, we have in a preceding section (p. 108) discriminated between
the individual terms by specifying the azimuthal quantum number k;
instead of k we have now two quantum numbers, viz. the azimuthal
quantum number l which corresponds to k - 1, and the inner quantum
number j. Instead of 1 = 0, 1, 2, ... (or, as formerly, k = 1, 2, 3, ...),
it is customary, as was mentioned on p. 126, to use the letters
s, p, d, ... ; the value of j is given as a suffix attached to these letters.
Examples of this notation are shown in fig. 8, for the case of the alkali
terms. For the X-ray terms a different notation has become estab-
lished, the terms being distinguished by a capital letter specifying
the shell in which they lie (K shell for n = 1, L shell for n = 2, and
so on), and by a roman numeral attached to the letter as a suffix, and
corresponding to the order of numbering within the shell.
The case of hydrogen is peculiar in one respect. Experiment gives
distinctly fewer terms than are specified in the term scheme of fig. 8;
for n = 2 only two terms are found, for n = 3 only three, and so on.
The theoretical calculation shows that here (by a mathematical coin-
cidence, so to speak) two terms sometimes coincide, the reason being
that the relativity and spin corrections partly compensate each
other. It is found that terms with the same inner quantum number
¿ but different azimuthal quantum numbers l always strictly coincide,
for instance, the ns and the np term, the p and the d term, and
so on; such pairs of terms are drawn close together in fig. 8. For
the value of the terms a formula was given by Sommerfeld (1916), even
before the introduction of wave mechanics; the same formula is also
obtained when the hydrogen atom is calculated by Dirac's relativistic
(E 908)
11


===== PDF PAGE 0176 =====

I50
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
wave mechanics. This formula, which reproduces the values of the
hydrogen terms with the greatest exactness, is:
a?22
E+ E, = E
1+-
Here E denotes the energy of the bound electron after deducting the
rest energy, and E, is the rest energy mc?; n, is the radial quantum
number; n, (Sommerfeld) is identical with Bohr's azimuthal quantum
number k, and corresponds therefore to the l + 1 of wave mechanics.
Since, however, as we have just seen, two terms with different l but
the same j always coincide when we take the spin into account, dis-
crimination between the terms by means of the quantum number no
is identical with discrimination by means of i; we therefore have
Np =j+&. The principal quantum number is then found as the
sum n = n, + N The constant a is given by
2те?
1
a =-
137'
dimensional considerations show at once that it is a pure number,
the only quantity indeed of zero dimensions (ignoring trivial numerical
factors) which can be formed from the three atomic constants e, h
and c. Since it gives the amount of the fine structure splitting, it is
called (after Sommerfeld) the fine structure constant. Z is the atomic
number (1 for hydrogen, 2 for Het, and so on). On account of the
smallness of a, Sommerfeld's formula can be expanded in ascending
powers of a'2?; a simple calculation gives
a-Z-
=--
nd,
where R is written for E,a'/2h, so that R is simply the well-known
Rydberg constant. The Balmer term - RhZ/n? is therefore modified
by a correcting factor, which depends on n, and gives the fine struc-
ture; the quantity e(n, k) of the formula on p. 107 is equal to the
additive correction
That (no
It should be particularly emphasized that the X-ray terms also are
well represented for all elements by Sommerfeld's formula.
One small remark on the fine structure constant may be added.
When a physical formula is to be devised, it may be possible to go a


===== PDF PAGE 0177 =====

VI]. HYDROGEN ATOM AND X-RAY TERMS
I5 I
good length on the score of dimensional considerations alone. An
example of this sort is the formula deduced in § 2, p. 16 for the scatter-
ing of light by electrons. Since the ratio of the total scattered energy
I to the primary energy Jo incident per square centimetre has the
dimensions of an area, and since from the three classical electronic
quantities e, m, c (we are concerned here with a purely classical effect)
only one quantity having the dimensions of a length can be formed,
viz. e?/mc, it follows that the scattering formula must be of the form
J/J0 = 76(e2/mc2), where k is a factor of proportionality of dimensions
zero (and of order of magnitude l). The real task of the theory is to
determine the constant k, by means of geometrical considerations
based upon definite ideas with regard to the mechanism of the process.
The occurrence, in the theory of the splitting of terms, of the dimen-
sionless fine structure constant a, whose value is given by e, c and h,
suggests the idea that there must be a deeper connexion between these
three quantities, on the strength of which one of them can be deter-
mined in terms of the other two. If this is so, there must be some
process involved which we do not yet understand, its geometry and
mechanism being still quite unknown. The discovery of this con-
nexion is a problem which fascinates many physicists. Its solution
would mean a great step towards understanding why charge, mass,
energy, &c., occur in minimum elementary quantities. We may add
that Eddington has put forward a theory for the geometrical explana-
tion of a, according to which 1/a is the value of En'(n-+1) +1 for n=4;
we cannot, however, go into this further. It may be remarked that
the idea that 1/a is an integer is somewhat dubious, as the most exact
experimental values give 1/a = 137•2.
We now proceed to consider the spectral lines which are possible,
consistently with the above scheme of terms. The selection rules
have already been stated (p. 140); they are
47 = 1, Aj=0, 1;
they do not allow all transitions, but only those indicated by arrows
in the scheme of terms (fig. 8, p. 148).
In the hydrogen and alkali spectra, as we have already explained
for the simple Bohr theory (fig. 13, p. 112; fig. 8, p. 148), the lines
which correspond to transitions from a p-term to the ground state
(s-term) are called the lines of the principal series; a principal series
of higher order contains the lines which lead to the next s-term (in
our diagram to the 2s-term). Transitions from the d-terms to the
p-terms give the diffuse series, those from the s-terms to the p-terms


===== PDF PAGE 0178 =====

I52
. SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
the sharp series. The higher series (fundamental series, &c.) lead from
higher levels to the terms of the third quantum state (n = 3), and
therefore fall outside the scope of our diagram of terms. We thus
obtain-for the case of sodium-the diagram of terms and lines shown
in fig. 9, which replaces the simple diagram of p. 112 (fig. 13).
For X-ray spectra an essentially different notation has secured
general acceptance; this also is indicated in fig. 8, p. 148 (see also fig. 15,
p. 113). The lines which correspond to transitions to the K-level are
called K-lines; lines whose final state is a term of the L shell are called
I-lines; and so on. Individual lines within these general classes are
distinguished by small Greek letters in accordance with a recognized
convention, which was also exemplified in fig. 15, p. 113.
The ka and
K lines form the doublet which arises in a transition of the electron
from the L to the I shell; R and I, correspond to the transitions
from the M to the K shell; and so on.
4. The Helium Atom.
In the helium atom two electrons revolve about the nucleus (nuclear
charge 2e); we have therefore 6 co-ordinates to deal with instead of
3, with the result that an exact solution is no longer possible. For
the purpose of obtaining a general idea of the possible states, an exact
solution is, however, not at all necessary; following Bohr, we can in
the first place neglect the mutual interaction of the electrons, and for
a first approximation treat the problem as if the two electrons moved
undisturbed in the field of the nucleus. Afterwards, the interaction
can be taken into account by the methods of the theory of pertur-
bations.
We shall therefore (as with the hydrogen atom) associate three
quantum numbers with each of the two electrons:
and we shall assume once for all that in the case of different I-values
the first electron possesses the higher azimuthal quantum number
(l> Iz). The corresponding angular momenta are compounded
vectorially (neglecting the interaction between the two electrons);
we thus obtain a total angular momentum
as also total orbital and spin angular momenta given respectively by
5=51 + 52.


===== PDF PAGE 0179 =====

VI]
THE HELIUM ATOM
I53
251/2
2P3/
3053/2
251/25/2
Volt
5.12
5.0
T70r
-Id
бр1
=222
5S
-62
5p1-
-5P2
-5d
-5f
5
45.
5000
4p1
-4702
- 42
-4
35-
P20?36
-3,65
4.0 -
- 60'6tILE
10000
3рt
- 6160, 73•
132
4978,61-
- 3302,94
15000
25
-2.64
3,0
1-2.5.
-5688,22.
11404,2=
8183,30-
-8194,82
. 20000
2.1
2701
202
2.0
25000
- 2.1
2852,83-
1-20
3302,34
30000
1.0 -
• D, 5895,930-
- 3427,1
35000
=D2 5889,963
-T.T
40000
0-75-
-1,63
-1.6
45000
Fig. 9.-Term scheme for sodium, taking account of spin; on the left are shown the energies
of the terms in electron volts (measured from the ground state); on the right the frequencies (in
wave numers) which are emitted at a transition downwards from the series limit, and also the values


===== PDF PAGE 0180 =====

I54
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CaP.
If, however, the interaction of the two electrons is taken into account,
the angular momenta of the electrons separately are no longer integrals
of the equations of motion, so that the angular momentum vectors are
not now fixed in space. The total angular momentum j is constant,
however, and of course must still be quantised even for an arbitrary
system of electrons, since it corresponds to a rotation of the electronic
configuration as a whole. The question is now, whether a many-
electron (two-electron) problem can still be characterized, at least
approximately, by other angular momentum quantum numbers. The
important factor here is the interaction of the two electrons, and the
coupling relations between the individual angular momentum vectors
(orbital and spin). If in fact, in consequence of the interactions
being slight, a precessional period is
slow, it will be possible to associate
the corresponding angular momenta,
approximately, with quantum num-
bers, viz. those which the angular
02
momenta would have, if there
were no coupling. It is entirely a
matter of the strength of the various
couplings.
An obvious assumption to make
ig. 1o.—Scheme of the so-called (17)-coupling
o a hrst approximation the orbital and spin-moment
of each electron are compounded into a resultant;
the vector sum of these two resultants gives the
total angular momentum j.
is the following. For every electron the orbital and spin moments
are firmly coupled; but the various electrons influence each other
comparatively little. Every electron will then be characterized
individually by the quantum number of its angular momentum j
(orbital plus spin); that is to say, the vector sum of l, and s,,
for the oth electron, still approximately carries out a motion of
precession round the direction of j., in spite of the disturbance by
the other electrons; then the j vectors of the various electrons are
compounded into a total angular momentum j, and in their turn
carry out a precessional motion round the latter (see fig. 10).
Another limiting case of the coupling relations is that in which
the spin vectors and the orbital vectors are compounded separately
into resultants l and s, so that for two electrons we have the diagram
of fig. 11. The vectors ly and l rotate round the total orbital moment i,


===== PDF PAGE 0181 =====

VI]
THE HELIUM ATOM
I55
the spin vectors s and s, round s, and then these two vectors precess
about j. One can understand how this vector model may come into
play, by supposing that besides the electrical forces of repulsion other
forces of a magnetic nature also act between the electrons; the latter
forces being determined by the magnetic moment of the electrons,
and producing a strong coupling between the spin vectors of the two
electrons.
Experimental results show that as a rule (in helium and the alka-
line earths) the second case of coupling is the one which occurs, it is
called the normal coupling case or, after its discoverers, the Russell-
Saunders coupling. This is the only case we shall consider here
although the case first described also actually occurs, as well as inter-
mediate stages between
these two extreme cases.
We may remind the reader
of the similar circumstances
in the case of the abnormal
Zeeman effect,
where the
Fig. II.-Scheme
of the Russell-
Saunders
or (Is)-coupling:
to i first
approximation the orbital moments
of
the electrons are compounded into a total
orbital moment I, also their spin-mo-
ments into a resultant spin-moment s,
and finally l and s into the rotal ingular
momentum i.
strengthening of the coupling between the external magnetic field
and the individual magnetic moments determines a transition to
the normal Zecman eflect, via the Paschen-Back effect.
In helium, the coupling relations are normal. The two orbital
moments l and ly are therefore in the first place combined into a
total orbital moment i, which must be a whole number and can there-
fore take only the values 1=4 - 1, 4-1+1,...,1+12. Simi-
larly, the two spin-moments s and sa combine into the total spin-
moment which (for two electrons) must likewise be a whole number:
since s and sy have the value 1, the two values s = 0 and s = 1 are
the only possible ones; in the former case the spins are antiparallel,
in the latter parallel. (In fig. 11, for easier visualization we have
assumed that the two spins form an obtuse angle with each other;
in reality they must always be either parallel or antiparallel to each
other.)
The term scheme of helium (see fig. 12) breaks up therefore into
tivo separate groups, according as the total spin is zero or unity; in


===== PDF PAGE 0182 =====

156
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHaP.
Parhelium
Orthohelium
Volt
32.21
F4,3,2
S
4.74-
702
f
4.5-75.
•70
75
- 7d
6P
- 6D
6s
op-
- 6d
-5P
- 5D.
5F
5p.
-5d
5f
5
55
5000-
1594
-4P
40
•4F
4р-
4а
-47
- 4
3.86
45.
3,70
3673,64447,
-12784,6
3.5
-18693,4.
-18684,2
10000-
4120,981
-3187,743.
3P
-4927,925387, 92 р 143, 7, 4009,27
•3D
•3d
• co
35
3pт
-3рг
2.936
2.855
7281, 3047, 736437,54468,974023,99-
3.0
15000
- 2,70
-4026,189.
-4026, 358
349
- 2,5
2.5-
=6678,149
4120,812-
4471,477
20000
4771,689
4713,143
2,0
4712,366
• 5875,618
•7065,185
• 5875,960
797=
25000
7.5-
7065,
==2.09
5015,67594, 727
•20582,04.
2pg
• 2p2
- 1.94
7.0-
ZP1/2P2
30000-
-25
-3888,603
- 1,85
-3888.646-
-10829,1
35000-
- 10830, 3
ZS.
+
- 1,69
to 15
-40000
Fig. 12.- Term scheme for helium; there are no inter-combination lines between orthoheliun
nd parhelium; orthohelium (for not too great dispersion) has the character of a doublet systen
The IS' term of parhelium is situated much deeper as indicated by the arrow


===== PDF PAGE 0183 =====

VI]
THE HELIUM ATOM
I57
the former case we speak of parhelium terms, in the latter of ortho-
helium terms. This separation of the terms into two groups is justified
by the fact, which has been proved experimentally and can easily be
put on a theoretical footing, that in general there are no transitions
between terms of the first group and terms of the second. From the
physical standpoint it is accordingly permissible to distinguish sharply
between parhelium and orthohelium, especially as it is only in excep-
tional cases that it is possible to transform a helium atom, which has
once shown the parhelium spectrum, in such a way that it emits the
lines of orthohelium.
In parhelium, then, the total spin moment s is 0; hence the total
orbital moment is identical with the total angular momentum: j=1.
This implies that the whole of the terms of parhelium are singlets,
ie. that to every azimuthal quantum number l there belongs only
a single term with the inner quantum number j equal to l.
In orthohelium, on the other hand, the total spin moment is equal
to 1, and it combines vectorially with the total orbital moment to
form the total moment j. Since all three vectors are whole numbers,
jin this case can take the three values
j=1-1, 1, l+1.
There are therefore three terms for every azimuthal quantum number,
and the term scheme of orthohelium is a triplet system. Here also,
however, as in the doublet spectra discussed above (p. 136), the
s-terms are single; in fact, l= O for these, so that j can only be equal
to s, i.e. to 1. In the alkaline earths (Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba), which like
helium have two external electrons, the triplet character can be easily
observed in the spectrum. In helium, however, a special feature occurs:
it possesses practically a doublet spectrum, since the P1 and P, terms
nearly coincide. As an example of this, we take the first line of the
sharp series, which corresponds to the transition from 3S to 2P. Exact
measurements by Houston have shown that this line consists of three
components:
35 → 2P0 ... 7065•707 A,| A1 = 0•495 A,
35 → 2P1 ... 7065-212 A
30 → 282. 7065-177 A
41=0-0358-
We see from these numbers that the splitting between the two lower
terms is only about one-fourteenth of that between either and the upper
term. The slightness of this splitting is the reason why for a long time
the spectrum of helium was referred to as a doublet system.


===== PDF PAGE 0184 =====

I58
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
We add a brief remark on the notation for the terms. A few lines
above we have used capital letters S, P, D, ... instead of small letters
(p. 126). This is customary in the case of several electrons for the
purpose of indicating the total orbital moment. It is also customary
to define the multiplet character, that is to say, the number of terms
belonging to a particular multiplet (all with the same principal and
azimuthal quantum numbers), by attaching this number to the term
symbol as a left-hand upper index; also, the multiplicity written down
is always the one which occurs when l is large, viz. 2s + 1. In fact,
the vector sum l + s = j gives the following values:
forl≥s: 1-8,1-8+1,.,6+8-1,6+s (2s+1 values),
forl 5s: s- 1,8-1+1,.,876-1,8+6 (21+1 values).
If, for example, s = 1, we have a triplet; but this holds only from
1 = 1 (P-term) upwards, while the term 1 = 0 (S term) is single. This
peculiarity is ignored in the use of the notation; the two terms are
written 3S, 3P, although in reality the former of these is single.
The individual terms of the triplet 3P are distinguished by right-
hand lower indices (suffixes), which indicate the value of j; in helium,
for instance,
1P1
for parhelium,
3P 0, 3P1, 3P2 for orthohelium.
Briefly, then, the notation used is as follows. The first number denotes
the principal quantum number-it indicates the shell which the
electrons occupy; if the electrons are in different shells, this quantum
number must be omitted. The letter indicates the total orbital moment,
the letters S,P, ... corresponding to the quantum numbers l = 0, 1, ....
The left-hand upper index gives the number of terms (at its maximum)
in the term group defined by the principal quantum number and the
letter—it is equal to 2s + 1. The right-hand lower index distinguishes
the individual terms of this group by assigning the inner quantum
number j for the total angular momentum.
Returning once more to the term scheme for helium (p. 156), we
have to point out that we have not shown in it the 13S-term for ortho-
helium, ie. the ground state to be expected. The reason is, that no
lines have been found spectroscopically which could correspond to a
transition to this term. We must conclude from this that in ortho-
helium the 13S-state is missing. In fact, since we can calculate the
position of this term approximately, we can tell approximately the


===== PDF PAGE 0185 =====

VI]
THE HELIUM ATOM
I59
places in the spectrum at which the lines must lie which correspond
to transitions to this term. In spite of the most thorough spectro-
scopic investigations in this region of the spectrum, not a single
line has been found which can be brought into connexion with such
transitions.
This result is quite inexplicable by the preceding principles as they
istand. If we look for its cause in some special property of the term,
we find the peculiarity that for this term all the quantum numbers
are the same for the two electrons. Thus, both electrons lie in the
I shell, and have therefore the same principal quantum number
Ny =Nz = 1, as is also in fact the case for the parhelium term 14S.
Since the azimuthal quantum number of an electron can never be
greater than n- 1, it must vanish in this case for both electrons:
11 = 12=0. (For higher S-terms, the two orbital moments could be
different from zero, and by antiparallel setting cause the total orbital
moment to vanish.) In orthohelium, the two electron spins are parallel,
and the components of the spin moments are therefore also equal,
01 = 02=2, so that the two sets of quantum numbers completely
agree. In parhelium, however, the electron spins are antiparallel, so
that the quantum numbers of the two electrons are separated in the
projection of the two spin components.
5. Pauli's Exclusion Principle.
The state of matters just described in the case of helium, viz. the
absence of the 13S-term, the expected ground state of the orthohelium
term sequence, suggested to Pauli (1925) a general examination of spectra,
to see whether, in other elements and under other conditions, definite
terms sometimes drop out. It was found that this actually happens;
moreover, the term analysis showed in all cases that in these missing
terms all the quantum numbers of the electrons agreed. Conversely,
it was also found, the terms always drop out when these quantum
numbers are the same. This discovery led Pauli to the following
principle:
The quantum numbers of two (or more) electrons can never ontirely
agree; two systems of quantum numbers, which are deducible from
each other by interchange of two electrons, represent one statc.
The second part of the principle enunciates the indistinguishability
of electrons. It is important for the enumeration of possible states,
as required for the theory of the periodic system, and especially for
statistics. It is to be remarked also that, in applying tho principle,
directional degeneration must be considered to be removed (for instance,


===== PDF PAGE 0186 =====

SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
by an external magnetic field). The individual electron can then be
characterized by four quantum numbers:
n =1,2,...,
1 = 0, 1, ..., n- 1,
ME 3-71 2 72,
Here n denotes the principal quantum number, which can take all
values from 1 upwards; & is the azimuthal quantum number, which
runs from o to n-1; j is the inner quantum
number, and is only capable of the two values
H
02
stated; m is the projection of j on the specially
distinguished direction and, according to the rules
Sy
for quantisation of direction, runs through the
2j+ 1 values between -jand +j. Alternatively,
instead of j and m we may use the projections of l
Fig I3.—Orbital Orbital moment I, spin moments, total moment j; with their projec-
tions on a specially distinguished direction.
and s on the special direction, viz. p, denoted previously by m. (p. 145)
and o (see fig. 13).
Another concept which is frequently employed is this. Two elec-
trons are said to be equivalent when they possess the same n and the
same l. Two equivalent electrons must therefore, in accordance with
Pauli's principle, differ from each other in the direction of I, or in the
spin direction; and only certain definite values, not all values, of
u and o are possible for them. It is otherwise with two electrons which
are not equivalent, but differ either in the principal or the azimuthal
quantum number (or in both); in this case all values of u and o are
possible.
In Appendix XXIV (p. 319) we give an example of the enumera-
tion of the terms for the two cases of non-equivalent and equivalent
electrons. We shall not wait here to discuss these problems-which,
though very simple in principle, are somewhat complicated to work
out-but proceed at once to the most important and concrete appli-
cation of Paul's principle, the theory of the periodic system.
6. The Periodic System. Closed Shells.
We have already frequently referred to the periodic system, or
table (see Table I, p. 35; fig. I1 shows a somewhat different form).
The periodic table is an arrangement of the elements in a scheme


===== PDF PAGE 0187 =====

VI]
PERIODIC SYSTEM: CLOSED SHELLS
I6I
which originally was drawn up on the basis of their chemical behaviour
and their atomic weights.
It has turned out, however, that the real
determining factor in the arrangement is not the atomic weight—
consider isotopy-but the atomic number Z, i.e. the number of elec-
trons revolving round the nucleus in the neutral atom. Now one of
the most important applications of Pauli's principle is to the eluci-
dation of the shell character of atoms, i.e. that property which finds
its expression in the periodicity of the atoms with respect to chemical
55Cs
- 87. Vi
, 56 Ва
- 88 Ra
57 La
, 89 Ac
58 Ce
907h
59 Pr
60N2
1920
61Il
19 K
-37 Rb
62Sm
120Ca
-38ST
63Eu
21SC
39 Y
64Gd
22Ti
407T
65T6
23V
41 No
66 Ds
• 3 Li
•11 Na,
24 Ст
42Mo
67 Ho
4 Вс
-12 Mo
25 Mr
43 Ма
68 Ет
5 B
- 13 AL
26 Fe
-44RU
69 ТИ
1Н‹.
6C
- 14 Su
27 Co
45 Rh
20 YO
7N
-15 Р
N28 Ni
146Pа
71Cр
8 0
-16S
- 4719
72 HE
I9F
-17 CL
30 Zт
-48Cd
73 Ta -
10 Ne
— 18 A
31 Ga
-497T2
74 W
32 Ge
-50S2
75 Re
33 As
-5156
760s
34Se
—52 Te
77JT
35 Вт
- 53].
78 Pt
36/т
-54 X
79AU
80 hg
8177
• 82 Р6
83 Ві
84Р0
85 Am
86Em—
—118 -
Fig. I4.-Diagram of the periodic system of the elements according to N. Bohr, exhibiting
the synthesis of the shells, and the chemical relationship, of the atoms.
behaviour. We shall develop the theory of the periodic system by the
method of proceeding step by step from a simpler element to the next
higher. At each step, therefore, starting from an element with an
electronic configuration which we know, we suppose the nuclear
charge to be increased by a unit, and at the same time an electron to
be inserted in the outer part of the electronic envelope of the known
atom; what we want to know about is the way in which this addition
of an electron takes place.
We begin with the simplest element-hydrogen (Z= 1). Its electron
in the ground state is in the lowest orbit, and has therefore for its


===== PDF PAGE 0188 =====

I62
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CнAP..
principal quantum number n= 1; we say, as has already been re
marked (p. 113), that the electron is in the K shell. With helium
a second electron appears; thus for both these electrons n = 1, and
therefore l = 0, and also u = 0. Hence, by Pauli's exclusion principle,.
they must possess different components of the spin moment. Since:
there are only two possible settings, viz. 01 = +1 and 02=-1
there are only places for two electrons in the K shell.
If we now add a third electron, there is no place for it in the
K shell, and so it must settle in the L shell. Let us count the number
of places in the L shell. First, as in the k shell, there are 2 electrons
with 1 = 0, distinguishable only by their spin components; next.
come 6 places for electrons with l= 1, since of course u can take
the three values —1, 0, 1, and for each of these there are two possible
settings for the spin. There are therefore 8 places altogether in the
I shell, and these are arranged (Stoner, 1924) in two sub-shells with
2 and 6 electrons. When the atomic number is steadily raised, the L
shell becomes gradually filled; the atoms concerned are Li, Be, B, C, N,
O, F, Ne. With Ne the I shell is completed; a new electron must.
settle in the M shell (Table IV, pp. 163, 164, 165).
We give the enumeration of the places in the M shell in the form
of a table:
1 = 0, M=
0,
0= 2 electrons
1 = 1, M=
= 1, 0, 1,
= 6
1 = 2, M = - 2, - 1, 0, 1, 2, 0 = 4: 10
in all 18 electrons.
In the M shell there are therefore 18 places, distributed over three-
sub-groups. The first two groups form together the second short.
period (of 8 elements); it extends from Na to A. Then, however, a
deviation occurs from the previously invariable order of succession in
which the electrons settle.
This order is always determined by the
energy released when a new electron settles (i.e. is bound). The energy
relations, however, are not always such that one shell must be com-
pleted before an electron settles in the next shell. On the contrary,
it may happen that an electron in an s-orbit of a higher shell is, from
the energy point of view, more firmly bound than in a d or forbit
of the lower, still incomplete, shell. This case occurs in the further
development of the M shell; the ten 3d-terms for the 10 electrons
still wanting are, as experiment shows, higher as regards energy than
the Is-terms which correspond to binding of the electrons in the


===== PDF PAGE 0189 =====

VII
PERIODIC SYSTEM: CLOSED SHELLS
I63
TABLE IV
DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRONS IN THE ATOMS
K
M
N
Ground
Ionization
Element
Term
Potential
(p. 158)
(in electron volts)
H
251/2
13•539
He
-
=
11
=
=
1,50
24•45
-
-
-
251/2
5.37
2
-
4So
2P1/2
11111
_
21
5•12
11
11
7.
•61
-
5•96
Neon
7•39
Configuration
111
.0
•3
15.80
4•32
6•
•09
6-
•57
• 80
6-76
6•74
25
7.40
26
7.83
Co
27
Argon
7.81
Ni
28
Configuration
7•606
Cu
29
7•69
Zin
30
9.35
Ga
31
5•97
Ge
32
7.85
As
33
9.4
Se
34
35
11•80
36
13•940


===== PDF PAGE 0190 =====

I64
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE
[CHAP.
TABLE IV (continued)
N
Element
Coof uation
Ground®
Term
Potention
Shells
(p. 158)
(in electron volts)
Rb 37
-
251/2
4-16
Sr
38
-
-
5-67
39
-
2
-
-
2D3/2
6-5
Zr 40
2
Cb 41
Krypton
-
2
-
3F2
1
-
°D1/2
Mo 42
Configura-
-
1
-
7-35
Ma* 43
-
Ru 41.
Rh 45
1111
-
-
-
7.7
-
-
-Fg/2
7-7
Pd
46
-
1S.
8-5
-
251/2
7-54
1,50
8•95
-
2P 1/2
5-76
Sn
Palladium
Sb
51
*Р.
7-37
Configuration
3
111111
*S3/2
8•5
Te
52
-
3Pг
53
54
11
2Pg/2
10
15,
12-078
251/2
3-88
5-19
2
2
Pr* 59
3H4
2
Nd* 60
4K,1/2
2
II*
61
Sm* 62
The shells Is to
The shells
Eu* 63
4d contain 46
5s to 5p
contain 8
8H3/2
Gd* 64 electrons
TЬ* 65
electrons
8
2
8Hy7/2
Dy* 66
9
2
"KLo
Ho* 67
10
6L10/2
Er* 68
11
SL10
Tm* 69
12
4K 17/2
76*70
13
3Ho
Lu* 71
14
2D3/2


===== PDF PAGE 0191 =====

.VI]
PERIODIC SYSTEM: CLOSED SHELLS
I65
TABLE IV (concluded)
Configuration
P
Ground
Element
of Inner
Term
Shells
(p. 158)
Hf* 72
2
-
2
3F2
Ta* 73
The shells
3
-
2
-
4F 3/2
W 74
Is to 5p
-
2
-
$Do
Re* 75
contain
-
2
655/2
Os* 76
68
6
2
5DA
Ir* 77
electrons
-
2
4F 9/2
Pt 78
2
-
-
3E4
Au 79
-
251/2
9.20
Hg 80
-
2
The shells
-
-
1S.
10-39
Tl 81
Pb 82
Is to 5d
2
1
2P1/2
6-08
Bi 83
contain
2
3P.
7.39
78
4S 3/2
8-0
Po 84
electrons
3P2
( )* 85
2P 3/2
Rn 86
-
6
-
1S0
10-689
( 1*87
-
251/2
•Ra* 88
150
Ac* 89
Radon
2D3/2
Th* 90
Configuration
ECONOMI
3F2
Pa* 91
4F3/2
U* 92
"Do
The table shows not only those distributions of electrons and ground terms
which have actually been ascertained from the spectra, but also those which
have been determined by considerations of analogy; the latter are indicated by
an asterisk attached to the symbol of the element. The probability of correctness
of the inferences from analogy is, however, very high.
N shell. The next two electrons to be added (K, Ca) settle therefore in
the N shell. Then, but not before, begins the filling up of the M shell,
which continues from Sc (Z = 21) to Zn (Z = 30). The formation of
the N shell then proceeds up to the element Kr (Z = 36). The process
described is repeated in the N shell; the two next electrons (Rb, Sr)
settle in the O shell (n = 5); the filling up of the N shell then begins,
along with intermittent settlement of electrons in the O shell. The
rare earths correspond to the completion of the N shell, which is
accompanied by the binding of 8 or 9 electrons in the O shell and
2 in the P shell; this explains the great chemical similarity of these
elements. All through, as has already been mentioned, the chemical
behaviour of the elements is determined by the electronic configuration
(E 908)
12


===== PDF PAGE 0192 =====

I66
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
in the outermost shell; elements with outermost shells of similar
structure possess in large measure equivalent chemical properties.
This is the explanation of the occurrence of periods in the system of
the elements. Thus, for example, the inert gases Ne, A, Kr, Xe and Rn
have all closed shells of 8 electrons; the alkalies are characterized by
the fact that one electron revolves round the atom outside closed shells;
the halogens, on the other hand, lack one electron to make up a closed
shell.
The problems of chemical binding and the chemical behaviour
of the atoms will be taken up again in detail in Chapter VIII (p. 248).
7. Magnetism.
In § 2 (p. 140) we have investigated at length the splitting up of
the terms of an atom in a magnetic field; it is determined by the
directing force of the magnetic field acting on the magnetic moments
of the spin and of the orbital motion of the electrons in the atom.
The magnetic moments within the atoms are also responsible
for the magnetic behaviour of the substance made up of these atoms.
Two cases have to be distinguished. A substance is called paramagnetic
if its atoms (or molecules) possess a magnetic moment. The mag-
netization of the substance, which depends on this, is clearly in the
same direction as the field, since of course it arises from the orientation
of the magnetic moments in the direction of the field. Further, it is
characteristically strongly dependent on the temperature, since the
orientation of the elementary magnets is opposed by the smoothing
out action upon direction which is due to the thermal motion. We
shall deal with this more fully in Appendix XXV (p. 322). On the
other hand, a substance is called diamagnetic if its atoms do not possess
a permanent magnetic moment; in this case the magnetization which
is produced is in the opposite direction to the field, and is practically
independent of the temperature.
Atomic theory gives the magnetic moments (compare the results
obtained above in connexion with the anomalous Zeeman effect, p. 140).
Thus, for atoms with closed outer shells the moment 0 is found (in
the inert gases, but also, according to measurements by Stern, in Zin,
Cd, Hg). S-terms have no orbital moment (l = 0), so that the magnetic
moment of the atom is entirely due to the spin; thus the alkalies,
with one radiating electron in an s-orbit, have a magnetic (spin)
moment of 1 Bohr magneton, and the same is true also of the noble
metals (Cu, Ag, Au). Those elements which have an intermediate
shell not yet completed possess large magnetic moments (for instance,
the elements of the iron group, and the rare earths).


===== PDF PAGE 0193 =====

VI]
MAGNETISM
I67
The assertions of the theory about the magnitude of the magnetic
moments of atoms can be tested by determining the magnetic sus-
ceptibility of the substances in question (Weiss, about 1910). However,
this only gives a value averaged over all those directions, and all those
values of magnetic moments, which occur; a direct test of the theory
cannot therefore be immediately obtained by this method.
The magnitudes of the moments can also, however, be measured
in the individual atom, as was shown by Stern and Gerlach (1921).
Their method bears approximately the same relation to the macro-
scopic method of Weiss, as Aston's method for the determination of
atomic masses bears to the macroscopic method of determining atomic
weights, which only gives mean values over all the isotopes present.
The method of Stern and Gerlach is based upon the deflection of a
molecular beam in a non-homogeneous magnetic field. We may regard
the atom with the magnetic moment as an elementary magnet of dimen-
sions which though small are still finite. If we bring this magnet into
a homogeneous magnetic field, it will move in a straight line in the
field; for the magnetic force acts on its north pole with the same
strength as on the south pole, but in exactly the opposite direction;
thus the axis of the magnet may possibly execute a pendulum motion
or precession about the direction of the field, but the centre of inertia
of the magnet either remains at rest or moves in a straight line.
It is otherwise when the field is not homogeneous. In that case the
forces acting on the north and south poles are not quite the same, so
that, besides the couple which the two magnetic forces exert on the
elementary magnet even in the case of a homogeneous field, a resultant
force also acts on the magnet as a whole, and imparts to it an accelera-
tion either in the direction of the magnetic field or in the opposite
direction. If then an elementary magnet flies through a non-homo-
geneous magnetic field, it will be deflected from its rectilinear path.
The amount of the deflection is determined by the degree of inhomo-
geneity of the field; in fact, to produce a deflection of sensible amount
the inhomogeneity of the field must be so marked that the field changes
decidedly even within the small length of the elementary magnet
(which in our case is at most of the order of magnitude of atomic
linear dimensions, viz. 10-8 cm.). Stern succeeded in producing a
sufficient degree of inhomogeneity by suitable construction of the
pole-pieces of a magnet, one piece being shaped as a knife-edge, while
the other piece, which he set opposite it, had a flat face, or was pro-
vided with a groove (fig. 15). The magnetic lines of force consequently
crowd together at the knife-edge, so that the magnetic field strength


===== PDF PAGE 0194 =====

168
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
is considerably greater there than at the other pole-piece. A fine
beam of atoms is now projected from an oven through a diaphragm
system so as to pass between
the pole-pieces. Each indi-
vidual atom is deflected in
the non-homogeneous field,
S
according to the magnitude
==
Fig. 15.- Diagrammatic representation
of Stern and Gerlach's apparatus. A mole-
cular beam issues from the oven O, and
passes between the pole-pieces of the
magnet (one of which has the form of a
knife-edge) to the receiving screen S.
and direction of its moment. The traces of the individual atoms can
be made visible on the receiving screen (by intensification if necessary,
as in photography).
According to the classical theory, a broadening of the beam must
be produced in this way on the screen, since the moments of the atoms
flying through the magnetic field can, on that theory, have all direc-
tions relative to the field. On the quantum theory, however, on account
of the quantising of direction, not all settings are possible, but only a
certain discrete number, as we have seen above in detail when con-
sidering the anomalous Zeeman effect (p: 140). The beam, as it appears
on the screen, will therefore be split up into a finite number of discrete
beams; in fact, there must appear on the screen exactly 2j+1
separate traces, if the atoms are in a state with the inner quantum
number j; for in this case there are just 2j + 1 possible settings, rela-
tive to the direction of the field, for the total angular momentum,
and accordingly also for the total magnetic moment.
The experiment when carried out did in fact show a separation of
the beam into several distinct beams; thus a beam of lithium atoms
was split up into two beams (fig. 16, Plate VIII), as it should be, since
the ground term of the lithium atom is a ?S-term (one valency electron
in an s-orbit [I = 0] with the spin moment ½). The magnitude of the
magnetic moment also could be determined from the amount of the
separation. In this way Gerlach succeeded in producing a direct proof
that the magnetic spin moment is exactly equal to one Bohr magneton.
A systematic investigation, upon various elements, yielded results
which were throughout in complete agreement with the theory.
Later (1933), Stern succeeded in so refining the accuracy of the
measurements as to make it possible to measure the magnetic moments


===== PDF PAGE 0195 =====

PLATE VIII
Ch. VI, Fig. I6.--Magnetic splitting up of a lithium beam by the method of Stern and Gerlach
Ch. VIII, Fig. 8. - Nitrogen bands (in the visible). Fine "triplets"
are seen, which corre-
spond to different rotational changes (by -1, o, 1); the regular sequence of these forms rotationl
bands with a " head".
All these separate bands are associated with a jump of the vibrational
quantum number, and with an electronic jump, which displaces the system into the visible.
1: 008
Facing p. 100.5


===== PDF PAGE 0196 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0197 =====

VI]
MAGNETISM
I 69
of nuclei. In this apparatus, which is a marvel of refined workman-
ship, the atoms are detected by means of specially constructed, highly
sensitive manometers, in which small changes of pressure are con-
verted into thermal or electrical disturbances, and so made measurable.
Interest, of course, is mainly directed to the proton. One is inclined
to conjecture that its magnetic moment is given by the formula for
the Bohr magneton, with the mass of the electron replaced by that of
the proton.
This nuclear magneton is therefore 1840 times smaller
than the Bohr magneton. Experiments were made by Stern on mo-
lecular hydrogen, and by Rabi on atomic hydrogen; the difficulty in
both cases is to reduce the magnetic moment of the outer electrons.
The results agreed in giving the moment of the proton as two to three
times greater than one nuclear magneton. We cannot therefore hope
to obtain a serviceable theory of the proton from that of the electron
(see § 8) simply by inserting the heavier mass instead of the lighter.
The moment has also been measured for the heavy isotope D of
hydrogen; it is less than a nuclear magneton.
8. Wave Theory of the Spin Electron.
In the preceding pages we have dealt with the theory of spin, and
the questions connected with it-fine structure, Pauli's exclusion
principle, &c.— solely on the basis of the vector model, regarding the
angular momentum vectors as given magnitudes, and operating with
them according to the rules of the classical or the Bohr theory, as the
case might be. We mentioned at the outset (p. 146) that this pro-
cedure can be justified by wave mechanics. We cannot give a complete
treatment here of the wave mechanics of the spinning electron, but
we should like to point out at least in what way electronic spin is
actually brought within the ambit of wave mechanics.
This extension of wave mechanics was introduced by Pauli (1925).
The leading idea of Pauli's theory is somewhat as follows. For sim-
plicity consider an isolated electron. Its state, according to Schrödinger,
is described by a wave function y(x, y, z, t), where 4? gives the
probability of the electron being found at the point considered. We
might now, keeping in view the idea of the rotating electron, introduce
the spin into the wave equation by taking into account the rotational
degrees of freedom. This, however, at once proves to be impossible;
for in that case two new quantum numbers would appear in the solu-
tions, as in every rotating system (e.g. I and m in the revolution of an
electron); so that we would obtain an essentially greater number of
states than the number actually found experimentally. This gives a new


===== PDF PAGE 0198 =====

I7°
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
proof that the idea of the rotating electron is not to be taken literally.
As has already been proved in § 1 (p. 136), it follows unequivocally
from the spectra, especially those of the alkalies, that for a fixed set
of three quantum numbers n, I, m the electron can be in two, and only
two, difterent states, which have also different energies. We can take
this new degree of freedom into account formally, by introducing
besides the ordinary co-ordinates an additional co-ordinate o, which
can take only two values altogether; we shall denote these values
by o= + and o=-, respectively. We can picture this to our-
selves by supposing, say, that one value of this variable characterizes
the state in which the spin is parallel to a specially distinguished
direction, while the other value of the variable denotes the antiparallel
setting. We thus obtain a wave function which now depends on five
co-ordinates: 4 = 4(x, Y, 2, t, o). It suggests itself, however, to split
up this wave function into the two components
4= 4+12, У, 2,00
1 4-(х, У, х, t),
which represent it respectively for the two possible values of the
variable o. It is evident that | 4+Iª specifies the probability of hitting
upon the electron at the place considered, and that with a spin direc-
tion parallel to the special direction; while | 4- |? is the corresponding
probability for the opposite direction of the spin.
The question now meets us: how are we to calculate with these
functions? For this Pauli has found the following method. In wave
mechanics, there corresponds to every physical magnitude an operator,
which is to be applied to the wave function. As such operators
we can employ, as in Schrödinger's theory, differential operators (e.g.
the component momenta Px = (h/2mri)(Q/Qx)); oI, as in Heisenberg's
theory, matrices or other similar mathematical forms. It is therefore
reasonable to associate operators also with the components so, Sy, Sa
of the spin moment (in units 1h/2m); these operators, however, do not
act on the co-ordinates x, y, z, t, but on the two-valued variable o.
By this we are to understand that the application of these operators
either changes the value of the magnitude o or leaves it urchanged,
while at the same time the whole wave function may possibly be
multiplied by a factor. It has proved advantageous to regard the
operators as "linear transformations" (matrices), and we usually
employ for them the expressions
Sx =
sy=-


===== PDF PAGE 0199 =====

VI]
WAVE THEORY OF THE SPIN ELECTRON
I7I
If, generally,
is such a matrix, then the operation a, applied to the vector of two
components i = ), means the production of a new vector in
accordance with the rule
a_+a_-
Thus we have
8 = (12) (4) =01
22/-
8 = (6-9)(4) =(-4)
The matrices are so chosen that they are subject to the same commu-
tation rules as the ordinary components of angular momentum (§ 5,
p. 127); further, in this case the z-direction is the specially distin-
guished direction, in which the spin, represented by the fourth co-
ordinate, has set itself. For s is a diagonal matrix with the proper
values (diagonal elements) +1, -1; the z-component of the angular
momentum has therefore one of the fixed values +1 or -1. On the
other hand, s and s, are not diagonal matrices; their values are there-
fore not measurable simultaneously with sy but are only statistically
determinate.
If now a magnetic field exists parallel to the z-axis, then, by § 2
(p. 144), the magnetic energy of the setting of the spin with respect
to the field direction is given by
1 h
Emas. = -2.
H
2uc
2 2т
The factor 2 here arises from the anomaly in the relation between
magnetic and mechanical moment in the spin, as compared with the
similar relation in the orbit—an anomaly mentioned on p. 112, and ex-
plained by Thomas as a consequence of the theory of relativity. In this
equation s is the operator of the total spin moment, and s= =s cos (s, Il)
is its component in the direction of the field.


===== PDF PAGE 0200 =====

172
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE
[CHAP.
As for the wave equation itself, in the absence of magnetic fields
it runs exactly like the Schrödinger equation for the problem in question:
(Wo - E)k= 0.
Here Wo denotes the energy operator, consisting of the kinetic and
the potential energy; for a one-electron problem we have
h.
Vo = am 2mi
A+V.
Since Wo does not act on the spin variable o, we can split up the wave
equation into the two components
(Wo - E) + = 0, (Wo - E)4== 0.
This signifies that without magnetic fields no transition is possible
between the two possible settings of the spin, and that the electrons
behave as if they possessed no magnetic moment.
If the atom is in a homogeneous magnetic field, the direction of
which we shall take parallel to the z-axis, the usual energy operator
Wo is supplemented by a term due to the magnetic field, viz.
-(eh/Amuc)Hs,, so that the wave equation now runs:
(W.-
4=0.
Here again the separation into the two partial functions can be
effected at once, taking into account the meaning of the operator sy.
We thus obtain the two equations
(Wo-s
Атмо
from which we deduce immediately that the magnetic energy is simply
added to the ordinary energy, so that an unperturbed term E, is split
up by the magnetic field into the two terms
eh
eh
Eo +
#,
and
Eo -
- H.
4пмс
Атрес
This double possibility of setting is the reason for the occurrence of
doublets in the spectra of the one-electron atoms.
We shall not proceed further here with the development of Pauli's


===== PDF PAGE 0201 =====

VI]
WAVE THEORY OF THE SPIN ELECTRON
I73
theory, but only remark that it has proved thoroughly successful,
so long at least as the electron velocities are not too great. It must
be emphasized, however, that Pauli's theory cannot be regarded as an
explanation of the existence of spin, since of course when it was con-
structed the experimental facts, like the twofold possibility for the
spin, and the ratio of the mechanical and magnetic moment, were
simply inserted in the theory from the outside.
An essential advance in this direction is made in Dirac's relativistic
wave theory of spin (1928). The object aimed at was to set up a
wave equation which should satisfy Einstein's principle of relativity.
According to this principle, the space co-ordinates x, y, z and the time
t (the last multiplied by cv - 1, where c is the velocity of light) stand
on a precisely equal footing. But Schrödinger's differential equation
p. 122) is not symmetrical in the four co-ordinates; it is of the
second order in the spatial differential coefficients, but of the first
order in the time derivative. Now Dirac has set up a wave equation
which satisfies the relativistic postulate of symmetry, and, as regards
form, is of the first order in all four variables. Although we cannot
discuss this theory in detail, we have to emphasize particularly that,
from very general principles, and with no special assumption about
the spin, it deduces all those properties of the electron which we
have summarized under the word spin (mechanical and magnetic
moment in the correct ratio). In its results it is to a large extent
equivalent to Pauli's theory, but it goes decidedly beyond the latter,
especially in its conclusions regarding swift electrons. In respect of form,
it differs from Pauli's theory in that it operates with four components
of the wave function, these replacing Pauli's two functions + and y.
Although the conclusions of Dirac's theory agree very well,
generally speaking, with experiment, yet even in it serious difficulties
occur, which up till now have only in part been successfully overcome.
There
is in the first place the theory of the many-electron problem,
which has not so far been successfully brought under the scheme of
Dirac's theory; this is ultimately connected with the fact that even
classically no satisfactory formulation of the two-body problem has
yet been found within the ambit of the theory of relativity.
A further serious difficulty arises from the fact that in the theory
of relativity the relation between the energy and the component
momenta is quadratic in all these quantities, viz. (Appendix V, p. 271)
For a given momentum G there are therefore always two values of the


===== PDF PAGE 0202 =====

I74
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
energy, +E and -E. In the classical theory we accept only one of
these values, + E, as having a physical meaning. This we have a right
to do since doing so never leads to a contradiction. With the smallest
value of G, viz. G = 0, we associate the value E, = +m c; since G
and # vary continuously, we have therefore, corresponding to all
values of G > 0, the values E > mc > 0. It is different in the quan-
tum theory; here changes of state may take place by a jump; what
is then to prevent E from falling by more than 2m,c in some process,
and accordingly, by leaping over the excluded region from -m c
to Im,c', getting into the negative region E < —Mc? A simple
example of this sort has been pointed out by O. Klein; it is called
Klein's paradox. If an electron is caused to fly through two wire
gratings, set up one behind the other (fig. 17), and a counter field is
applied between the gratings, the electron in passing through loses
part of its kinetic energy. If the retarding potential is increased,
the loss of energy by the electron becomes
greater and greater, until finally it is unable
to pass through the gratings, but
is re-
fected. So far, everything is classically in
Fig. I7.-Illustration of Klein's paradox. According to Dirac's
relativistic wave mechanics, an electron can overcome a counter
field, if the potential difference exceeds twice the rest energy moc?
of the electron.
order.
But if we go on to increase the counter field still further
Dirac's theory shows that electrons can once more pass through
the gratings, provided the potential difference between them is
greater than twice the rest energy mc? of the electron. In this case,
however, the electrons emerge from the field with negative energy.
If now we calculate the probability that the passage through this
counter field will take place, we find that it increases with increasing
field strength between the two gratings, but that for all electrostatic
fields which can be produced experimentally it is vanishingly small.
Although this is reassuring, and leaves unquestioned the applicability
of Dirac's theory to ordinary problems, the theoretical difficulty in
principle still remains.
Dirac has sought to solve the difficulty by the following bold line
of argument.
In the formal theory, states of negative energy are on a perfectly
equal footing with those of positive energy. This equality does not
appear, however, to exist in nature; ordinary processes of motion
all take place in the domain of positive energy. To give expression to


===== PDF PAGE 0203 =====

VI]
WAVE THEORY OF THE SPIN ELECTRON
I75
this fact, Dirac assumes that all the states of negative energy are
normally occupied by negative electrons, which, however, do nothing
to make themselves physically observable. We are therefore to con-
sider that we are continually surrounded on all sides by electrons with
all possible (negative) energies, without our noticing it at all. That of
course implies very violent treatment of the ordinary accepted laws of
electrodynamics; only electrons with positive energy can generate a
field. From this sea of electrons, which extends from (- co) to the
level —m.c?, electromagnetic fields, say in an act of absorption in the
atom, can raise an electron, and bring it into the energy region
E > mc'; it then takes its place as an ordinary electron and generates
electromagnetic fields in accordance with the ordinary laws. There
remains behind, however, an empty place in the sea of negative energy
states—a hole-and clearly this has entirely the same character as a
positive charge. Dirac's formula show that this hole in the midst of
the ordinary negative electrons with negative energies behaves exactly
like a positive electron with positive energy. Klein's paradox can now
be explained very simply by the remark that the state of negative
energy, into which the incident electron would go after passing through
the opposing field, is already occupied by another electron; the process
is therefore impossible.
Dirac thought at first that these holes corresponded to the protons,
though he was conscious of the difficulty of the difference in the masses.
But when the first indications of the existence of positrons were found
by Anderson (see p. 43), Dirac at once saw in this a confirmation
of his theory, and by prediction of phenomena took a hand in the
direction of experimental research.
The most important consequence of the theory is that, by absorp-
tion of light quanta rich in energy, a pair, electron + positron, can be
produced, and that conversely two such particles can unite, and pro-
duce a light quantum. The calculation of the probability for this
follows the usual methods of wave mechanics, since the first process,
according to Dirac, really consists in the raising of an electron out of a
state (of negative energy), the second in the fall of an electron from a
high state into a hole.
Both processes are positively demonstrated
to-day, as experimental results. We have the first in the showers
which are produced by cosmic rays (see p. 13); further, cases are
observed where by irradiation of light elements with y-rays positive
and negative electrons are liberated, which can be attributed to this
process of materialization. In the converse process, the neutralization
of two electrons of opposite sign, the energy 2m,c c= 106 electron


===== PDF PAGE 0204 =====

176
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
volts becomes free (if the kinetic energy of the electrons is neglected);
but momentum must also be conserved, and this excludes the case of
emission of a light quantum, which of course has the definite momentum
m,c/c=m,c. There are therefore two possible cases; either two light
quanta originate in empty space, each equal to mc° = 110° electron
volts; or a particle in the neighbourhood takes up the residual momen-
tum. If this is an electron, it will carry off a third of the energy 2m c,
so that the light quantum will retain ⅔m c = 680,000 electron volts;
if it is a nucleus, it will on account of its great mass take over very
little energy, and the light quantum will therefore take the full amount
of 2m, c = 106 electron volts. In point of fact, in scattering of y-rays
by atoms, besides the ordinary Compton scattering monochromatic
waves are emitted, one of which has an energy of very exactly half a
million electron volts; it arises presumably from the reunion of a posi-
tron, produced primarily at the absorption of the g-rays, with a nega-
tive electron (Gray and Tarrant, Joliot). The process has been demon-
strated unequivocally by Klemperer (1934). He made boron and
carbon artificially radioactive by bombardment with protons and their
heavy isotope (see § 5, p. 59); these materials then become a powerful
source of positrons. The positrons are absorbed by a metal piece,
which is enveloped on its two sides by two hemispherical counters,
adjusted for y-rays (see p. 32). It is then observed that
the two counters give a simultaneous response, with a frequency
exceeding that of any possible chance coincidences, so that two
light quanta are being emitted at the same time in opposite
directions; and it is found by absorption measurements that it is
the half-million electron volts radiation which is involved. The
other two processes are (in agreement with the theory) relatively
extremely rare.
In spite of its successes, Dirac's hole theory of the positron is pro-
visional rather than final. If a serious attempt is made to connect the
theory with electrodynamics, while postulating that only free electrons.
and the holes, but not the great body of electrons of negative energy,
shall act as generators of a field, the resulting formalism is extremely
complicated, and seems far from satisfactory. Here theoretical physics
is confronted with a serious problem.
9. Application of Wave Mechanics to the Nucleus.
The application of wave mechanics to the nucleus is met by the
essential difficulty that the dimensions of the nucleus are of the same
order of magnitude (10-13 cm.) as the diameter of the electron, which


===== PDF PAGE 0205 =====

VI]
WAVE MECHANICS AND THE NUCLEUS
177
TABLE V-NTOLEAR ANGULAR MOMENTUM I
Element
Isotopes
1
H
2
2
He
4
3
Li
N
14
16
9
19
15
31
17
35
25
Mn
55
29
Cu
63, 65
10j- 100
48
Cd
111, 113
1110, 112, 114, 116
80
Hg
1298,20, 202, 904
news
0
82
Pb
1201, 206, 208
0
83
Bi
209
presumably represents a limit to the validity of the current theories
(see § 2, p. 46). Nevertheless, we can make some confident affirmations
about the quantum-mechanical properties of the nucleus, and by so
doing bring various phenomena into rational relationship with each
other. We might naturally expect that in general nuclei have angular
momenta, which obey the laws of quantum mechanics (§ J, p. 127).
This is actually the case. The most important method for determining
the quantum number I, which measures the angular momentum of the
nucleus, depends upon the measurement of the hyperfine structure of
spectral lines. With regard to some lines, as those of mercury, it
had long been known that they consist of an aggregate of very fine
lines; but it is only lately that these have been systematically investi-
gated and brought into connexion with the nuclear moments. Hor
the latter purpose, it must be assumed that the nucleus acts on the
outer electrons not merely as a point charge, but with forces which
depend on the orientation of its axis relative to the electrons. It is
found that there are two kinds of hyperfine structure, one kind arising
from the presence of several isotopic nuclei, cach of which obviously


===== PDF PAGE 0206 =====

178
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHaP.
acts on the electrons a little differently from the rest; and the other
kind occurring with a single isotope, and therefore dependent on direct,
presumably magnetic coupling. The second kind is much the more im-
portant. The quantum-mechanical treatment is obvious. The nuclear
angular momentum I and the electronic angular momentum J com-
bine vectorially into the total moment I, and since each of the numbers
is an integer or half an integer, definite configurations of lines arise,
in the same way as in the Zeeman effect. By measurement of the
separations and the intensities of the lines, we can determine I. We
can also call in the aid of the Zeeman effect, and find out how the
hyperfine structure changes in the magnetic field. In this way
many I-values have been determined; a few of these are given
in Table V. This shows that most of the elements with even
atomic number show no splitting (I = 0); the moments therefore
seem to neutralize each other in pairs. Elements of odd atomic
number have half-integral angular momenta, though nitrogen, it is
true, has 1 = 1.
These results show clearly that in the nuclei the electrons are not
to be counted as basic component parts (§ 4, p. 57). Consider the
nitrogen nucleus, for example; if it were composed of 14 protons and
T electrons, each of which has the moment ½, the total moment would
necessarily be half-integral; actually, however, it is 1. Conversely,
the odd isotopes of Cd, Hg and Pb would have an odd number of
electrons, and therefore an even number of particles altogether; but
the total moment is half-integral. On the other hand, the facts are
in agreement with Heisenberg's hypothesis of a structure consisting
of protons and neutrons, each with moment ½. The nitrogen nucleus
would then consist of 7 neutrons and 7 protons, i.e. of 14 particles,
in agreement with the evenness of the moment; and the same holds
of Cd, Hg and Pb.
There is another method for the determination of the
nuclear moment, based upon the intensity relations in the band
spectra of molecules (§ 3, p. 238); but we cannot deal with this
here.
Closely connected with the mechanical moment of nuclei is their
magnetic moment.
We have already (§ 7, p. 166) made some
remarks about the determination of this quantity, particularly
for the proton. We may add here that
it is also possible to
evaluate magnetic nuclear moments by the theoretical calculation
of the dimensions of the fine structure, and comparison with the
measurements.


===== PDF PAGE 0207 =====

VI]
WAVE MECHANICS AND THE NUCLEUS
I79
The quantities so far considered are properties of the nucleus in
its natural state of equilibrium. But nuclei, as we have seen, can also
be excited and disintegrated (§ 6, p. 61). The points for consideration
are: what are the experimental facts, and how far can they be explained
theoretically?
A general remark may be made in advance. The fact that we can
make any attempt at all to study nuclear processes rests on our recog-
nition of the circumstance that only heavy particles— neutrons, protons,
a-particles-come into account as elementary constituents of the
nucleus, with no electrons or positrons. (We ignore B-disintegration
here, relegating it to a special later investigation of the decomposition
of neutrons into protons and electrons, or of protons into neutrons and
positrons.) Light particles, in fact, would move so swiftly under the
action of the nuclear forces that relativistic effects at their fullest
intensity would require to be taken into account. A thoroughly satis-
factory relativistic quantum mechanics is, however, not yet available
- even allowing for Dirac's successes (§ 8, p. 169). With heavy particles,
on the other hand, the velocities remain so small that we can apply
the non-relativistic quantum mechanics as a sufficient approxima-
tion.
The first step is the experimental determination of energy levels
in the nucleus. For this it would be necessary to excite nuclei to emit
radiation, so that we might deduce the energy levels in the nucleus
from the frequencies of this radiation, just as we do in the case of the
external electrons, viz. by using Bohr's relation hv = Ez- Ef. In
point of fact, as we have already mentioned, in a few cases nuclei have
successfully been caused by bombardment with a-particles to emit
y-rays; but the material is still too meagre. More is got from the
radioactive nuclei, which emit y-rays spontaneously. The most fruitful
method for determining their frequencies consists, not in this case in
direct measurement, which on account of the shortness of the wave-
lengths is difficult, but in an indirect procedure, which, moreover, is
of great interest for its own sake. We have already mentioned (§ 1,
p. 30) that there are two kinds of P-emission: a continuous spectrum,
attributed to-day to the breaking up of a neutron into proton + electron;
and a discrete spectrum, of which we say, that it is of secondary
origin. The evidence for the latter assumption is this: in the case of
some substances, which emit a- and B-rays simultaneously, we also
find two transformation products (recognizable by their transformation
constants). The bismuth isotope, ThC, splits up thus: 65 per cent
with B-emission into the polonium isotope ThC', and 35 per cent with


===== PDF PAGE 0208 =====

I80
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE
[CHAP.
a-emission into the thallium isotope ThC", according to the scheme
-81 Th C
83 ThC-
- 84 Th C'
In the case of other substances, however, e.g. radium and actinium,
in spite of the most thorough investigation, the only product found is
that corresponding to the a-transformation. Consequently the B-rays
cannot come out of the nucleus. Now some of these substances show
a measurable y-radiation; this suggests therefore that the f-rays
come from the external electronic envelope, from which they are
expelled by this y-radiation.
The correctness of the suggestion is proved by the fact that simple
relations exist between the energies of the B-rays and the energy levels
of the electronic shells. In the first place we have
E, = Es + A,
where Fi, = hy, is the energy of the y-ray, Es that of the B-ray, and
A the energy required to remove the electron. Again, the same y-ray
can knock an electron out of the K, L or M shell; between the energies
of the f-rays we have then the relations
It has been found that the measured p-spectra do admit of grouping
in accordance with these relations (Ellis (1921), Meitner). Moreover,
it was possible to test the idea by causing the y-rays from the lead
isotope ThB to fall on lead, when it was found that the electrons pro-
duced photoelectrically had the same velocities as the B-rays from
ThB itself. Further, observations on the electrons liberated from
platinum by these y-rays showed that their velocities were greater,
by exactly the difference corresponding to the work of removal for
lead and for platinum. Measurement of the -energies then gave at
the same time, by the preceding equation, the energy of the y-ray.
In this way it was found possible to draw up fairly extensive term
schemes for various radioactive substances.
We have therefore to
picture radioactive disintegration in the following way (Meitner, 1925).
The disintegration begins with a-emission; the resulting nucleus is in
an excited state, and reverts from this to the normal state with


===== PDF PAGE 0209 =====

VI]
WAVE MECHANICS AND THE NUCLEUS
I8I
y-emission. The proof of this rests on the high precision of the energy
measurements, which allowed it to be decided that the rays come from
the envelope of the final product, not from the original disintegrating
substance.
The theory is capable of rendering a far-reaching account of this
process of internal conversion of light energy into particle energy;
the problem is that of finding how a spherical light wave, with its
centre in the nucleus, is absorbed by the external electrons. The wave-
mechanical calculation (Hulme, Taylor, Mott, 1932) furnishes results
with regard to the relative intensities of the B-rays, originating in the
K, L, M shells respectively. It is found, moreover, that besides the
process of internal absorption of a y-wave, a process is possible (Smekal,
1922) in which the excitation energy of the nucleus is, by means of the
electromagnetic coupling, given up directly to the outside electrons,
without a y-ray appearing. By taking into consideration this radiation-
less process of conversion of nuclear energy into energy of the outside
electrons (Fowler, 1930), we obtain better agreement of the calculated
intensities with those observed. Another set of phenomena affording
information about the energy levels of the nucleus is the fine structure
of a-rays (Rosenblum, 1931), and the occurrence of weak groups of a-rays
of abnormally long range (Rutherford, 1933). The explanation of these
processes is not far to seek, if we remember that the a-emission in
these cases is accompanied by y-emission. When the a-ray is emitted,
the residual nucleus can be left at various energy levels of short life;
the energy of the a-particles is therefore not unique, but has different
values corresponding to the excitation levels of the nucleus. The
nucleus subsequently returns to its ground state, with y-emission.
This is the explanation of the fine structure, which the use of powerful
magnets has brought to light. But it can also happen, in an a- or in a
p-disintegration, that the resulting nucleus is left behind in various
excitation levels of long life; in such a case the nucleus can either
return to its ground state, with y-emission, and then emit an a-particle,
or it can emit an a-particle directly, with energy greater by the energy
of the excitation level. In order that the latter event may happen
often enough to be observable, the half-value period of the excited
nucleus must be sufficiently short. But we know experimentally, and
can also, as we shall see presently, explain theoretically that great
a-energy always runs parallel with shortness of life. We may thus
understand the rare occurrence of a-particles of very long range.
Here we come into contact with the fundamental law of radioactivity,
the explanation of which is one of the greatest successes of quantum
(E 908)


===== PDF PAGE 0210 =====

182
SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP.
mechanics. This law, which was discovered experimentally by Geiger
and Nuttall (1911), gives a relation between the velocity o of the
a-particle and the life period I of the emitting nucleus: it runs
log T = A + Blogu,
where A and B are constants.
The explanation, which was given independently by Gamow and
by Condon and Gurney (1928), depends on a deep-seated distinction
between quantum mechanics and ordinary mechanics, which is of
importance in other cases also (as in cold electron emission, p. 222).
In order to get a mechanical picture of the binding of an a-particle to
the rest of the nucleus, we must imagine a field of force which holds
it fast, and whose potential
therefore has the form of a
crater (fig. 18). We know
the form of the outside
walls of the crater, for the
scattering experiments (§ 3,
p. 51) tell us that Coulomb's
Fig. 18.-Crater form of the poten-
tial of the field of force which binds
an a-particle to the rest of the nucleus.
law holds down to very short distances—for uranium, certainly to less
than ro = 3-10-12 cm. The crater edge is therefore certainly higher than
102/ro (where the factor 4 arises from the double charge of the a-particle),
and this is 14-10-6 erg. But the energy of the escaping a-particles is
less than half this value. If therefore an a-particle is originally inside
the crater, according to the laws of classical mechanics it could never
get out.
It is different in quantum mechanics. Here the motion of the
particle within the crater is represented by a wave— a standing wave,
in fact. Consider an optical analogy, the total reflection of a ray of
light, which passes through glass and meets at a sharp angle the plane
surface separating glass and air. From the corpuscular point of view
no light penetrates into the air. According to the wave theory, how-
ever, there exists in the air also a sort of wave disturbance, which, it
is true, carries off no energy, and only penetrates a few wave-lengths
into the air space. But if we now set a second piece of glass with its
face parallel to the face of the other, and at such a short distance that
the disturbance in the air gap reaches it with intensity not too much


===== PDF PAGE 0211 =====

VI]
WAVE MECHANICS AND THE NUCLEUS
I83
impaired, then a small amount of energy at once passes into the second
body, and the incident wave is propagated through it, though of course
very much weakened. The weakening obviously diminishes rapidly,
as the air gap is made narrower, until in the limit when the two pieces
of glass come into contact, the ray goes through with intensity un-
changed.
In wave mechanics, we have quite a similar state of affairs at the
walls of our crater. If these are of finite height and thickness, the
standing waves inside the crater are by no means completely obliterated
at the wall, but are propagated in it in weakened form, and emerge at
the outside as progressive waves. Since, however, the square of the
amplitude, 4? gives the probability of occurrence of the particles,
we must conclude that the particles can penetrate through the wall
with a frequency which is given by | 4?. This will clearly diminish
extremely rapidly with increasing thickness of the rampart; here the
important matter is the thickness at the height which corresponds to
the energy of the a-particles (see fig. 18, p. 182). Swift a-particles will
therefore have a much greater probability of getting out than slow
ones; this corresponds qualitatively to Geiger and Nuttall's law. The
exact analysis (Appendix XXVI, p. 326) leads to a somewhat compli-
cated formula of similar character; to obtain this, detailed assumptions
about the interior of the energy crater are not required-its radius
at the upper edge is really all that matters. For this radius a value in
the neighbourhood of 8-10-13 cm. is found in all radioactive nuclei,
and it is just this constancy of the effective radius which forms the
foundation of Geiger and Nuttall's formula, with fixed constants A
and B. The penetrability of the potential wall explains the fact
(§ 6, p. 61) that the disintegration of lithium nuclei by protons can
be observed for so small velocities that the distance of nearest
approach is much larger than the radius of the Li nucleus.
The
proton
wave penetrates into the interior of the Li nucleus and
determines a small probability for the presence of a proton inside
the nucleus, which becomes unstable and breaks into two a-particles.
The model used in these considerations is highly simplified; only
one particle is assumed to move, the other constituents of the nucleus
not being considered separately, but only as the sources of the force
acting on the moving particle.
Recently various attempts have been
made to treat the nucleus as a system of many particles with the help
of the methods of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. For this pur-
pose definite assumptions about the forces between the elementary
particles (neutrons and protons) are necessary. It then becomes pos-


===== PDF PAGE 0212 =====

184 SPIN OF ELECTRON: PAULI'S PRINCIPLE [CHAP. VI
sible to determine the stationary states of the nucleus and compare
the energy levels with the observations mentioned above (p. 179); the
most important is, of course, the ground state the energy of which
gives the mass of the nucleus. The same forces come into play when
a beam of particles (protons, neutrons) is scattered by a nucleus; the
observation of scattering processes gives therefore an independent test
of the assumptions made.
We know the Coulomb repulsion between two protons. But this
force is certainly small compared with those forces of unknown origin
which keep the particles together; their range must be of the order
of the nuclear radius (10-13 cm.). Wigner (1933) assumed these to be
ordinary central forces falling of with the distance according to a
law Ae-ra. Heisenberg (1932) proposed a theory where the forces were
similar to the "exchange" forces by which quantum mechanics ex-
plains chemical valency (see p. 253) and which depend on the parallel
or antiparallel setting of the spins of the particles involved. A modifi-
cation of Heisenberg's assumptions about the spins has been introduced
by Maiorana. Both these theories are able to account for the empirical
fact that the binding energy varies as N and the nuclear radius as
VIT, if N is the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus. A
law containing two constants, like that mentioned above, explains
roughly the behaviour of the masses. But we shall not enter into a
discussion of the results obtained, as the fundamental conceptions are
rather doubtful.
Bohr (1936) has shown that the experiments on absorption and
scattering of neutrons by nuclei can be qualitatively explained if one
remembers that the nucleus consists of many particles all interacting
with forces of the same order, so that it is not possible to talk about
excited states of a single particle. He even thinks it likely that the
protons and neutrons in the nucleus entirely lose their individuality.
A complete theory of the nucleus will doubtless only be found in
connexion with an explanation of the real nature of the elementary
particles, and their relation to electromagnetic fields.


===== PDF PAGE 0213 =====

CHAPTER VII
Quantum Statistics
1. Heat Radiation and Planck's Law.
We have already mentioned several times that the quantum theory
is of statistical origin; it was devised by Planck when he was en-
deavouring to deduce the law of heat radiation (1900).
If, contrary to the order of historical development, we have dis-
cussed the quantum theory of the atom before quantum statistics,
we have our reasons. In the first place, the failure of the classical
theory displays itself in atomic mechanics-for instance, in the ex-
planation of line spectra or the diffraction of electrons-even more
immediately than in the attempts to fit the law of radiation into the
frame of classical physics. In the second place, it is an advantage to
understand the mechanism of the individual particles and the elemen-
tary processes before proceeding to set up a system of statistics based
upon the quantum idea.
In this chapter we shall supply what is lacking, and begin with
the deduction of the law of heat radiation, following Planck's method.
We think of an enclosure, say a box, whose walls are heated by some
contrivance to a definite temperature T. The walls of the enclosure
send out energy to each other in the form of heat radiation, so that
within the enclosure there is a radiation field. We characterize this
electromagnetic field by specifying the energy density u, which in
the case of equilibrium is the same for every internal point; if we
split up the radiation into its spectral components, we denote by
u, du the energy density of all radiation components whose frequency
falls in the interval between y and v+ dv. Thus the function u
extends over all frequencies from O to co; it represents a continuous
spectrum. Up till now we have been occupied with line spectra, which
are emitted by individual atoms in rarefied gases. But even molecules,
consisting of only a limited number of atoms, do not send out isolated
lines as single atoms do, but narrow "bands "
, often not resoluble.
And the more numerous and more densely packed the atoms are, the
185


===== PDF PAGE 0214 =====

I86
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CAP.
more the lines run into one another so as to form continuous strips.
A solid represents an infinite number of vibrating systems of all
frequencies, and therefore emits a continuous spectrum.
Now there is a theorem of Kirchhoff's (1859) which states that the
ratio of the emissive and absorptive powers of a body depends only on
the temperature of the body, and not on its nature; otherwise radiative
equilibrium could not exist within a cavity containing substances of
diferent kinds. (By emissive power is meant the radiant energy
emitted by the body per unit time, by absorptive power the fraction
which the body absorbs of the radiant energy which falls upon it.)
By a black body is meant a body with absorptive power equal to unity,
i.e. a body which absorbs the whole of the radiant energy falling upon
it. The radiation emitted by such a body-called " black radiation"
—is therefore a function of the temperature alone, and it is important
to know the spectral distribution of the intensity of this radiation.
The following pages are devoted to the determination of the law of
this intensity.
With regard to the experimental production of black radiation, it
has been proved by Kirchhoff that an enclosure (oven) at uniform
temperature, in the wall of which there is a small opening, behaves
as a black body. In fact, all the radiation which falls on the opening
from the outside passes through it into the enclosure, and is there,
after repeated reflection at the walls, finally completely absorbed by
them. The radiation which emerges again from the opening must
therefore possess exactly the spectral distribution of intensity which
is characteristic of the radiation of a black body. The same also holds
good of the radiation in the interior, for the radiation emerging from
the opening is of course simply the totality of the components of the
cavity radiation, which fall upon the opening from within.
Without going beyond thermodynamics and the electromagnetic
theory of light, we can deduce two laws regarding the way in which
black body radiation (or, as it is also called, cavity radiation) depends
on the temperature. Stefan's law (1879) states that the total emitted
radiation is proportional to the fourth power of the temperature of the
radiator; the hotter the body, the more it radiates. Proceeding a step
further, W. Wien found the displacement law (1893) which bears his
name, and which states that the spectral distribution of the energy
density is given by an equation of the form


===== PDF PAGE 0215 =====

VII]
HEAT RADIATION AND PLANCK'S LAW
187
where the function F is a function of the ratio of the frequency to the
temperature, but cannot be defined more precisely from the stand-
point of thermodynamics. These two theorems can be proved, as is
shown in Appendix XXVII (p. 329) by treating the radiation as a
thermodynamic engine which—by means of a hypothetical movable
mirror-can do work in virtue of the radiation pressure; so that, on
account of the Doppler effect, arising from the motion of the mirror,
the frequency of the radiation is altered, and therefore its energy con-
tent also. We may remark that Wien's law includes Stefan's law; to
deduce the latter, we have only to integrate over the whole spectrum:
Putting x = v/T, and taking x as a new variable of integration, we
find
so that the total radiation energy is proportional to the fourth power
of T, since the integral with respect to
90
x is independent of I, being a mere
constant.
60
The reason for calling Wien's law
the "displacement law" is this. It was
70
123209
found experimentally that the intensity
of the radiation from an "incandescent
60
body, maintained at a definite tem-
50
perature, was represented graphically,
as a function of the wave-length, by a
40
curve of the form sketched in fig. 1.
For extremely short, as also for ex-
30-
tremely long
waves, the intensity is
vanishingly small; hence it must have
20
a maximum value for some definite
10
1450°
1215°
Fig. I.-Distribution of intensity of heat radiation
as a function of the wave-length, according to measure-
935°
ments by Lummer and Pringsheim.
3
4 м
5
wave-length Imax. If we now change the temperature of the radiat-
ing body, the intensity graph also changes; in particular the position
of the maximum is shifted. In this way it was found from the
measurements that the product of the temperature and the wave-


===== PDF PAGE 0216 =====

I88
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
length, for the corresponding maximum of intensity, is constant; of
Amax T = const.
This relation is explained at once by Wien's law. In the first place,
the energy density and the radiation intensity have the same spectral
distribution; they differ, as can be shown from theoretical consider-
ations, only by the constant factor c/4. Further, we have always up
to now referred to the energy distribution as a function of the fre-
quency v, u, representing the radiation energy in the frequency interval
dv. The displacement law, however, refers to a graph showing the
intensity distribution as a function of 1, so that we have now u, repre-
senting the energy in the wave-length interval dì. The conversion
from u, to u, is easy: obviously we must have u, du =u, dh; and,
since 1v= c, we have, as the relation between du and da, dy|/v= d2|/1.
Hence, for the spectral distribution of energy expressed as a function
of the wave-length, we find
We can now prove the displacement law at once, by calculating the
wave-length for which u, is a maximum. The condition for this is.
du, /dr = 0, or
157
* (ia) =0,
from which there follows
iF (5) + 58(17) =0.
This is an equation in the single variable cAT, whose solution, assum-
ing it exists, must of course have the form
N1 = const.
Thus the theorem about the displacement of the intensity maximum
with temperature follows immediately from Wien's law. The value of
the constant, it is true, cannot be determined until the special form
of the function F is known.
About this function, however, thermodynamics by itself has nothing
to say; to determine it, we must have recourse to special represen-


===== PDF PAGE 0217 =====

VII]
HEAT RADIATION AND PLANCK'S LAW
I89
tations by a model. All the same, it is clear from thermodynamical
considerations that the form of the law given by the function I must
be independent of the special mechanism. As the simplest model of a
radiating body, Planck therefore chose a linear harmonic oscillator of
proper frequency v. For this oscillator, we can on the one hand de-
termine the energy radiated per second; this being the radiation emitted
by an oscillating dipole (p. 133), it is given by
2e?(ї)º
2e?
8€ =
-=.
308
Этой (272) 32,
where e is the energy of the oscillator, and the bars denote men tar
over times which, while great in comparison with the period
tion, are yet sufficiently small to allow us to neglect the
emitted during its time of continuance. For the oscillator WE
course
m. jr = Elin = Epot =
On the other hand, the work done on the oscillator per second by a
radiation field with the spectral energy density u, is
as follows from the equation of motion of the oscillator, and is proved
in Appendix XXVIII (p. 333). In the case of equilibrium, these two
amounts of energy must of course be equal. Hence we have
8712
If therefore we know the mean energy of an oscillator, we know also
the spectral intensity distribution of the cavity radiation.
The value of é, as determined by the methods of classical statistics
(§ 6, p. 9), would be
€ = KT,
where k is Boltzmann's constant; for, according to Boltzmann's
theorem (proved at p. 14), in the state of equilibrium the value e for
the energy of the oscillator occurs with the relative probability e-*T
so that we obtain e by averaging over all values of e, with this weight
factor. Putting for brevity P = 1/kT, we find


===== PDF PAGE 0218 =====

I90
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[Стар.
Joe-Re de
=-бр
108 р
=
This mean value & is independent of the nature of the radiating system
(oscillator), as follows at once from the method of calculating it; it
must hold in exactly the same form for a system of atoms or other
radiating particles.
If the classical mean value of the energy of the oscillator, as thus
determined, is substituted in the radiation formula, the result is
U, =
~ kl.
This is the Rayleigh-Jeans radiation law (1900, 1909). We see in the
first place that it agrees, as of course it must, with Wien's displacement
law, which, as a deduction from thermodynamics, holds in all cases.
For the long-wave components of the radiation, i.e. for small values
of v, it also reproduces the experimental intensity distribution very
well; in this region the intensity of the radiation increases with the
frequency, in proportion to its square. For high frequencies, however,
the formula fails; we know from experiment that the intensity func-
tion reaches a maximum at a definite frequency and then decreases
again. The above formula, however, fails entirely to show this
maximum; on the contrary, according to the formula, the spectral
intensity distribution increases as the square of the frequency, and
for extremely great frequencies, i.e. for extremely short waves,
becomes infinite; the same is true of the total energy of radiation
u=, u, du; the integral diverges. We have here what is called the
" ultra-violet catastrophe"
Attempts have been made to remedy this very conspicuous failure
in the theory by the following hypothesis. Suppose that, as in chemistry,
a finite reaction time is needed before equilibrium is attained, and let
the reaction velocity in the case of cavity radiation be very small, so
that a very long time must elapse before equilibrium is reached,
during which time the system as a whole, in consequence of external
influences, will in general, we may well imagine, have completely
changed. But this certainly does not go to the root of the matter;


===== PDF PAGE 0219 =====

VII]
HEAT RADIATION AND PLANCK'S LAW
IgI
for we can suppose of course, at least theoretically, that the cavity can
be maintained unchanged at constant temperature for as long as we
please, so that the above abnormal state of equilibrium would neces-
sarily set in some time after all.
In these circumstances, Planck put forward the bold idea that
these difficulties can be removed by postulating discrete, finite quanta
of energy to; the energy of the oscillators is to be (besides e = 0) either
equal to to or to 2e0 or to 3e0, and so on. In this way we do in fact
obtain Planck's radiation law,
which is verified experimentally with
striking accuracy. The essential point is the determination of the
mean energy e; in point of form the investigation only difiers from
the earlier one (p. 190) in replacing integrals by sums; for the indi-
vidual energy values, now as before, occur with the frequency given
by the Boltzmann
factor, but now only the energy amounts
NEo (n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...) are possible, instead of all amounts as before.
Hence, we have for the mean value,
=1=0
- =-
18
n= 0
n=0
Ege-BEo
=-
€0
(B = 1/kT)
so that, on substitution of this expression in the radiation formula,
we obtain
U, =-
In order that this formula may not be inconsistent with Wien's dis-
placement law, which, being deduced from thermodynamics alone, is
certainly valid, we must assume that
€ = hu,
where h is a universal constant (Planck's constant); for the tempera-
ture can only appear in the formula in the combination v/I.
This
gives Planck's radiation law
8ThU3
U, =


===== PDF PAGE 0220 =====

I92
QUANTUM STATISTICS
As we remarked above, this radiation formula is in very good agree-
ment with experimental results. The distribution of intensity for
various temperatures is shown graphically in fig. 2. For low frequencies
the function increases approximately as the square of v; for, if
hv/kI KI, we can expand the exponential function in the de-
nominator, and obtain a series in ascending power of hu/kT, the first
2 тах
13-
4000
3500
12-
11-
0007
3000
350
2000
о-
15
20
term of which corresponds precisely to the Rayleigh-Jeans radiation
formula:
8Thv3
U, =
kl+...;
for long-wave radiation Planck's formula therefore agrees with the
classical one.
Not so in the short-wave region; if hv/kT » 1, the


===== PDF PAGE 0221 =====

VII]
HEAT RADIATION AND PLANCK'S LAW
I93
exponential function has a value much greater than unity, so that we
can leave out the 1 in the denominator; for short waves we thus
obtain the radiation law in the approximate form
U,=
e hulkI,
a form which had previously (1896) been obtained by Wien experi-
mentally, from his measure-
ments in this region of the
8000
1
2 тах
spectrum (fig. 3). Between 50-
the domains of these two
limiting laws there lies a
continuous transitional re-
gion, which contains the 40-
maximum of the distribu-
tion curve. This maximum,
in accordance with Wien's
law, is displaced towards 30-
the region of short waves
0009L
as the temperature rises.
Calculation of the inten-
sity maximum leads in the 20-
0000k
same way as before to the
relation
KT
8000
== ImaxT = C, 10-
hYmax
where C is a constant,
6000
which is found by solving
4000
a transcendental equation,
4
5
10.
and has the value 0•2014.
We have mentioned above
Fig. 3.—The same as fig.
2 for higher temperatures; the
unit for the ordinates is smaller than in fig. 2
(Chap. I, § 8, p. 23) that
the atomic constants k and h can be determined by means of the
spectral distribution of energy in black body radiation. The first
determination of h, in fact, was effected by Planck by means of
Stefan's law and Wien's displacement law. According to the former,
the total energy radiated, from 1 sq. cm. of the surface of a body heated
to temperature T', is J = oT*; o is called the radiation constant, and
has the value o = 5-77 × 10-5 erg/(cm.? sec. degree*). We obtain
it theoretically by integrating Planck's distribution function over the


===== PDF PAGE 0222 =====

I94
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
whole spectrum. On the other hand, the measurements give for the
constant in Wien's law (marT = const.) the value 0-288 cm. degree.
(To give an idea of its order of magnitude, it is sufficient to remark
that the intensity maximum of the radiation from the sun, which
radiates like a black body at the temperature I = 6000°
°, lies in the
green region of the spectrum, i.e. at a wave-length of about 1500 Á.)
From these two empirically determined constants, h and k can be
calculated; the values so obtained agree very well with the correct
ones.
We may add one brief remark. From the general course of the
distribution curves we can see how low the efficiency is, when glowing
heated bodies, such as incandescent lamps, are used for purposes of
illumination; for the visible spectral region occupies only a small
strip in the figure giving the intensity curves for the heat radiation,
and the rest of the radiated energy is lost, so far as illumination is
concerned.
To return to the method of proving Planck's formula: it goes with-
out saying that his hypothesis met at first with the most violent
opposition. Physicists were unwilling to believe that the law of radia-
tion could only be deduced by introducing the quantum hypothesis;
this they regarded as a mathematical artifice, which they considered
might in some way or other be interpreted without going outside the
circle of classical ideas. All attempts, however, at such an interpre-
tation have been a complete failure.
To Einstein is due the credit of having been the first to point out
that, apart from the law of heat radiation, there are other phenomena
which can be explained by means of the quantum hypothesis, but
which are unintelligible from the standpoint of classical physics. In
the year 1905, Einstein put forward the light quantum hypothesis, and
as experimental evidence for it cited the law of the photoelectric
effect; this we have already dealt with (§ 2, p. 69).
2. Specific Heat of Solids and of Polyatomic Gases.
A year or two later (1907) Einstein showed that Planck's formula
for the mean energy of an oscillator,
finds direct confirmation in the thermal behaviour of solids. It is a
fact of experiment that at high temperatures a law holds called Dulong
and Petit's law, which states that the molecular heat, ie. the specific


===== PDF PAGE 0223 =====

VII]
SPECIFIC HEAT
I95
heat per mole (p. 8), is approximately 6 cals/degree for all solids.
From the classical standpoint this law is at once intelligible. In a solid,
every atom can be regarded as a harmonic three-dimensional oscillator,
since of course in a solid we think of the atom as quasi-elastically
bound to a certain position of equilibrium. The mean kinetic energy
falling to them as three-dimensional oscillators, by the rules of classical
statistics, is 3kT; so that a mole of the substance possesses the energy
U = 3LkT = 3RT, where R is the gas constant, and is approximately
equal to 2 cals/degree. The specific beat is found from this as the
increase of energy for a temperature increase of 1º, so that
c.=00 = 3R ~ 6 call/degree.
Experiment, however, shows deviations from this rule; and the harder
the body, i.e. the more firmly the atoms are bound to their equilibrium
positions, the greater are the deviations; thus, for diamond, the specific
heat per mole at room temperature is only about 1 cal/degree.
Einstein's explanation of these deviations is that it is not permissible
in this case to use the classical expression for the mean energy of the
oscillators, but that we must apply the expression obtained by Planck
for the mean energy of a quantised oscillator. In that case the
mean energy of the oscillators per mole is
3Lhv
hv/KT.
U =
In this formula ho is the elementary quantum of the vibrational energy
of the oscillators; it is so much the greater, the more firmly the atoms
are bound to their equilibrium positions; loose binding is equivalent
to small vibrational energy, and so to low frequency. The important
point now is, whether hy is less or greater than kT. In general, at
room temperature hv/T < 1, so that we can simplify the formula
for the energy of the oscillator by expansion. Hence in this case it
passes over into the classical formula
hv/kT
U = 3RT
= 3RT +...,
(1 +ho/hiT +...)-1
and so gives Dulong and Petit's law.
If, however, the atoms are very firmly bound (as in diamond),
or if the specific heat is measured at very low temperatures, hu/kT
becomes comparable with unity, or even greater than unity, and
deviations occur from Dulong and Petit's law. We then obtain for


===== PDF PAGE 0224 =====

I96
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
tha snacific heat a curve of the form shown in fig. 4, which for large
of T rises asymptotically to the classical value of 6 cals/degree,
• ---
alls away for low temperatures, and at I = 0 passes through
the origin. Experimental investigations to test the results given by
this theory, mainly carried out by Nernst and his colleagues, showed
approximate agreement between theory and experiment, particularly
1.0г
09-
0.8
0.7-
0.6
∞0 0.5
Aluminium
@=396°
0,4
0.3
0.2
0.7
100
200
300
400
1.0
0,9
0.8
0.7
C. 0.6
00 0,5
0,4
Copper
0-309° -
0,3
02
0.7
100
200
300
-=T
@ is
as regards the fact that the specific heat approaches zero as the
temperature diminishes. Nevertheless they indicated deviations which
proved that the theory in the form in which it then existed still
required improvement.
These improvements were made by Debye, and independently by
Born and Kármán (1912). They rest on the following considerations.
Up to this point we have dealt with the individual atoms of the solid
(crystal), as if they performed undisturbed harmonic vibrations inde-
pendently of one another. This, however, is by no means the case,


===== PDF PAGE 0225 =====

VII]
SPECIFIC HEAT
197
since of course the atoms in the lattice are very strongly coupled
together. We therefore ought not to say that the Latoms in the crystal
perform oscillations of the same frequency, but must rather deal with
the coupled system of 3L vibrations (corresponding to the 3L degrees
of freedom of the L atoms per mole), and accordingly write down the
energy in the form
3L
hv,
where v, is the frequency corresponding to an individual vibration.
It would of course be a difficult undertaking to try to evaluate this
sum directly on the basis of some assumed model. But we can obtain
approximate formula; the simplest method-which serves moderately
well for monatomic crystals-was given by Debye, and is as follows.
The proper vibrations of the individual atoms of the crystal lattice
appear in the ordinary theory of elasticity as elastic proper vibrations
of the whole crystal; though, it is true, only waves whose lengths are
much greater than atomic distances actually come under observation
(as sound waves). Hence, for an approximate evaluation of the above
energy sum, we may replace the spectrum of the proper vibrations of
the individual atoms by the spectrum of the elastic vibrations of the
whole crystal. We have therefore to solve the problem of determining
the spectrum of the elastic vibrations of a body which from the stand-
point of the theory of elasticity is regarded
as continuous.
Since
similar problems (counting proper vibrations)
will also occupy us later, we shall deal with
this one here in some detail.
For simplicity, we take a body in the form
of a cube, of side a, and try to find its proper
vibrations, that is to say, the standing waves
Fig. 5.-Example of a proper vibration in a cubical enclosure;
every side must correspond to a whole number of half wave-lengths.
(In the example k, = 7, kg = 4.)
a
which can exist in this cube. This is the same problem, in three
dimensions, as we have already met with in the one-dimensional case
(vibrating string); and we also mentioned the two-dimensional case
of the vibrating circular membrane (p. 125). For every proper vibra-
tion it is necessary that each side of the cube should cut of an
exact whole number of half wave-lengths (fig. 5). If therefore a plane
wave is propagated in this cube, in the direction specified by the


===== PDF PAGE 0226 =====

I98
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CAP.
direction cosines a, B, y (so that a? + 8ª + y'= 1), the projection
of a side on this direction must be an integral multiple of 1/2. Thus
we obtain the three equations
The case a = 1, B = y = 0 is trivial; the wave advances parallel to
the first side, and the proper vibrations are the same as in the case of
a string fixed at both ends. But the foregoing conditions are necessary
for the existence of a proper vibration, in the three-dimensional case also.
We can now consider the spectrum of these proper vibrations.
In the first place, the three conditions, by squaring and adding, give
4a?
11? + 1izz + 7632 =
2
so that the wave-lengths of the proper vibrations are determined by
means of the sums of the squares of three whole numbers ky, fiz, kg.
We may with advantage represent the
individual proper vibrations by a point
8
in the space of the k,'s, by associating
the point in k-space whose three co-
ordinates are ky, ky, his with the proper
5
vibration defined by the three preceding
40
equations. But the number of proper
3
vibrations with a wave-length > 1 is
1
Fig. 6.-Counting proper vibrations: the number of
vibrations with wave-length > 1 is equal to the number
01234567841
of lattice points inside the circular arc shown, and this is
approximately equal to the area of the quadrant.
then just the number of points (k, fiz, tz) which lie within a sphere of
radius 2a/1 and in the first octant of the k-space (because the foregoing
equation k] + liz + k3? = 4a?/1ª represents a sphere in the k-space, with
centre at the origin and radius 2a /1). All proper vibrations with greater
wave-length than 1 are therefore represented by points which lie within
this sphere in k-space. The limitation to the first octant of the sphere is
obviously needed, since of course the integers k are positive.
The required number of points is approximately equal to the
volume of the spherical octant just defined. We may easily convince
ourselves of this with the aid of fig. 6 (though this, of course, is only
two-dimensional). Since the co-ordinates of the lattice-points are
whole numbers, the small squares formed by the lattice-lines have the


===== PDF PAGE 0227 =====

VII]
SPECIFIC HEAT
199
area 1. The error made in replacing the number of lattice-points
within the circle (sphere) by its area (volume) is small compared to
the correct value itself, if the number of points within the circle (sphere)
is large. The number of proper vibrations > 1 is therefore equal to
the volume of the spherical octant, i.e.
Z=
8 3
where c denotes in this case the velocity of the elastic sound waves.
From this we get at once the number of proper vibrations in the fre-
quency interval between y and u + dv:
4TV
dz =
We shall return to this formula later; the method of proving it is
general, and not confined merely to elastic proper vibrations. More-
over, as has been shown by Weyl, the formula is true whatever may
be the form of the volume V.
We now return to the determination of the mean energy of the
atoms in a solid. The formula already deduced (p. 197), viz.
hvy
can now be transformed by the method used above, i.e. by regarding
the frequencies v, no longer as proper vibrations of the atoms, but as
frequencies of elastic waves in the body. Since we know the number
of these vibrations in the frequency interval between v and v + dv,
we can rewrite the sum as an integral, in the integrand of which this
number of vibrations appears as the weighting factor for this vibra-
tional state, alongside the original summand; thus, roughly
AMV
It must be observed, however, that the total number of proper
vibrations of the crystal is finite, viz. equal to 3L; a maximum fre-
quency vm therefore exists, which is defined by the equation
4TV
3I = Z = 308 Km,
or
Um = 0V
i(2)


===== PDF PAGE 0228 =====

200
QUANTUM STATISTICS
The preceding integral is therefore not to be taken to co, but only to
this limiting frequency as its upper limit. For the energy U we thus
obtain the expression
U =
3
"Xm xơ dx
= 3RT
Хт"
e 1'
where for brevity Xm is written for hum/kT. This relation is known as
Debye's formula,
which clearly gives a better approximation than
Einstein's model of independent oscillators, all with the same
frequency (fig. 1, p. 196). Debye's formula was still further im-
proved by Born and Kármán, who in the enumeration of the proper
vibrations took into account the lattice structure of crystals, to which
in the preceding counting process we have paid no heed whatever.
They thus obtained separate formula for the various types of crystal
structure.
Empirically, this refined theory has been confirmed throughout.
E.g. experiment gives a T-law for the specific heat at extremely low
temperatures, whereas the simple Einstein theory leads to an expo-
nential law for its increase with temperature. Debye's theory, however,
leads to the correct law for low temperatures; in fact, for these tem-
peratures, am tends to infinity, so that the integral in the formula
for U becomes practically constant, while the fourth power of I stands
before the integral; the specific heat is found from the energy by
differentiation with respect to the temperature, and the experimental
Ta-law therefore follows as it ought to do. Recent investigations by
Blackman (1935), it is true, have shown that sometimes the measured
specific heat seems to obey the T-law at temperatures not low enough
to justify the preceding theoretical explanation. He has shown that a
refined application of the theory of Born and v. Kármán which takes
account of the lattice structure of the crystals is able to explain these
cases; according to the arguments he adduces there should be an
increase of specific heat at still lower temperatures, and the real T3-law
should only be expected at the very lowest temperatures, not yet
employed for this measurement. This increase of the specific heat is
actually observed, and many other predictions of the theory are also
verified. One might say that at the present time the experimental facts
relating to the specific heat of solids have been completely explained.
The quantum theory of the oscillator can be applied in an exactly


===== PDF PAGE 0229 =====

VII]
SPECIFIC HEAT
20I
similar way to polyatomic gases. Here also the specific heat, as deter-
mined experimentally, increases with temperature in accordance with
Planck's formula corresponding to the molecular vibrations. We have
seen in Chap. I (§ 5, p. 9) that the classical theory of specific heats has
to assume that the electronic motion in the atom does not contribute
to specific beat, but that the heat content comes from the motions of
the atoms and molecules themselves; the atoms having only trans-
latory motions, while diatomic molecules have two rotational degrees
of freedom (round the two axes perpendicular to the neutral line). The
explanation of this fact, which was rather puzzling to pre-quantum
physics, is of course the enormous size of the binding energy of the
electrons compared with the average energy kI of thermal motion.
If we replaced the electrons by virtual oscillators having frequencies y
corresponding to the terms of the line spectra, then the energies hu
would be large compared with kT. At normal, and even very high
temperatures, none of these oscillators would be excited. This explains
immediately why they do not contribute to the specific heat.
Similar considerations hold for the rotations of molecules consisting
of light atoms. We have seen that the rotational energy is given by
E; — j372/877 A, j=0, 1, 2,.., corresponding to Bohr's quantum theory
p. 100); wave mechanics replaces j? by i(j + 1) (p. 129), but in both
cases the difference between neighbouring energy levels is € = hº/4 A.
Here A means the moment of inertia of the molecule, and e is greatest
when A is smallest, i.e. for the molecule Az. One should expect that
for temperatures given by kI < e the rotational energy of H, should
vanish; this is really the case, as was first observed by Eucken (1912),
who found that at about 40° K. the specific heat of H, has decreased
to the value for a monatomic gas. For all other gases the critical tem-
perature is to lo to all an absoration of this cite of the co oplete
process, a decrease of the specific heat, can be observed, and from this
the moment of inertia calculated. The results are in good agreement
with other observations, as on band spectra (p. 238), and with calcula-
tions from theoretical models.
3. Quantisation of Cavity Radiation.
We now return to the law of cavity radiation. We have seen in
the preceding section that Planck's hypothesis has been brilliantly
successful not only for cavity radiation, but also in the theory of
specific heats. The latter success furnishes additional strong support
for the quantum theory.


===== PDF PAGE 0230 =====

202
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
On the other hand, with regard to the deduction of the radiation
law by Planck's method, it is unsatisfactory, in so far as it is based in
part on the laws of classical physics and only in part appeals to the
quantum theory. The method by which the formula is obtained,
connecting the mean energy of an oscillator with the radiation field
in a cavity, viz. u, = (87v/0)e, is purely classical; in deducing it,
the classical laws of absorption and emission by an oscillator are
employed.
Can this circuitous route via the absorbing and emitting oscillator
be avoided? The idea suggests itself, in view of the methods of Ray-
leigh-Jeans and Debye, that we should try to deal with the electro-
magnetic field, within a cubical cavity with reflecting walls, in exactly
the same statistical way as with the proper vibrations of crystals in
the theory of specific heats. The cavity with reflecting walls possesses
precisely the same kind of proper vibrations as a crystal, and we can
therefore calculate the number of these vibrations in a definite fre-
quency interval between v and v + du in the same way as before:
ATV
dz = 2
We have here, however, an extra factor 2, since for each possible
wave-length and direction of wave normal there are two different
waves, corresponding to the two independent directions of polarization.
It is now only consistent to assume that every proper vibration
behaves like a Planck oscillator with the mean energy
hv
where we are simply extending the method of calculation and line of
thought of last section, from the proper vibrations of the crystal lattice
to the proper vibrations of the cavity. In this way we again obtain
Planck's formula
1
hr
2, dr = T
8nhu3
=-
Although this method of deduction is formally extremely simple, it
contains all the same a serious difficulty of principle.
The formula
used for the mean energy of an oscillator is bound up with the idea


===== PDF PAGE 0231 =====

VII]
QUANTISATION OF CAVITY RADIATION
203
that an oscillator of frequency u can possess not only the energy hu,
but also integral multiples of this energy quantum, the frequency of
occurrence of the energy nhv in an oscillator being proportional to
• Thus we obtained the mean energy of an oscillator as the
mean value
Enhve nhulkI
=
00
If we extend these ideas to the proper vibrations of the cavity, treating
those as if they were oscillators, it follows that an electromagnetic
proper vibration of frequency v can have the quantity of energy nhv.
This would mean, in the language of the light quantum theory, that a
light quantum (photon), which is associated with an electromagnetic
vibration of frequency v, can take the energy values nhv; this is con-
trary to Einstein's light quantum hypothesis, according to which the
energy of a light quantum is always hv. This hypothesis of Einstein's,
however, has to-day, on the evidence of experiments relating to the
elementary atomic processes, reached the status of an assured fact.
The attempt to explain the law of cavity radiation by means of classical
statistics, merely supplemented by the quantum hypothesis, therefore
fails when we try to translate the deduction of the radiation formula
by undulatory considerations into the language of the corpuscular
theory.
4. Bose-Einstein Statistics of Light Quanta.
We can also try to deduce the radiation formula, not as above
from the pure wave standpoint by quantisation of the cavity radiation,
but from the standpoint of the theory of light quanta, that is to say,
of a corpuscular theory. For this we must therefore develop the
statistics of the light-quantum gas, and the obvious suggestion is to
apply the methods of the classical Boltzmann statistics, as in the
kinetic theory of gases; the quantum hypothesis, introduced by
Planck in his treatment of cavity radiation by the wave method, is
of course taken care of from the first in the present case, in virtue of
the fact that we are dealing with light quanta, that is, with particles
(photons) with energy hr and momentum ho/c. It turns out, however,
that the attempt to deduce Planck's radiation law on these lines also
fails, as we proceed to explain.
We do not in this case characterize a radiation component, as we


===== PDF PAGE 0232 =====

'04
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
id before, by its wave-length and the direction cosines of its wave
ormal, but by the component momenta associated with it in de
Broglie's theory, viz.
Px =
Since, however, as we know from our previous investigations (p. 198),
the only standing waves which can exist in a cubical cavity (of side a)
are those which satisfy the conditions
20
761 =
it follows that the momentum space of the light quanta is also discon-
tinuous; in fact the two sets of equations give
Рх =
2a
2a
2z =
kig;
we therefore see that the component momenta can only be integral
multiples of h/2a. The momentum itself is given by
h
2 =
==2a
VIK + 1022+7633).
In the classical statistics (§ 6, p. 9) the momentum space was
divided into cells of arbitrary form and magnitudes 01, w, ...; the
ratio of the size of the cell to the total momentum space w, i.e.
9s=wg/w, was called the statistical weight of the cell. Here the momen-
tum space is covered discontinuously; the statistical weight of a cell
w, is therefore simply the number of points (ky, fiz, kig) which lie within
it. This follows from the principle of correspondence, as it is neces-
sary to have a continuous transition to classical theory. There is
therefore a smallest cell, among those containing any point at all;
it is customary in quantum statistics to use the word " cell" for
this smallest cell, i.e. really for the triplet of numbers ky, liz, kz.
We must therefore find another name for the elementary region of
statistics ws. We shall call us a "sheet"
• The number of cells
(ky, kiz, kig) in the sheet ws is then its statistical weight gs. We now
choose for the form of the sheet the spherical shell between the
momenta p and p+ Ap. Being merely a formal expedient, the
division into sheets is quite arbitrary. The number of cells (e.g. the
number of possible states) that is contained in such a sheet is


===== PDF PAGE 0233 =====

VII]
BOSE-EINSTEIN STATISTICS
205
found from the formula deduced above (p. 202) for the number of
proper vibrations of the cavity in the frequency interval between v
and v + Av, if we remember the relation p = hv/c:
ATV
98 = 2
U3AU=21MV
- р Др.
We can now see, with this expression before us, that the result
could also be obtained by dividing up the whole phase space-i.e.
co-ordinate space and momentum space together-into smallest cells
of magnitude h°, and then counting the number of these cells which
lie in that region of phase space which corresponds to the spatial
volume and the region between p and p + Ap in the momentum
space; taking account of the doubling of states due to polarization,
we thus find
i.e. the same expression as before. The improvement in the new method
of counting, as compared with that of the Boltzmann statistics, is
merely this, that the quantum theory assigns a definite size to the
smallest cells, into which we have to partition the phase space for the pur-
poses of statistics. In the ordinary kinetic theory of gases- disregard-
ing the case of gas degeneration, which will be dealt with later-the size
of the cells played no part, but dropped out in the further course of
the investigation. In this case of light quantum statistics, however
(as also in the case of gas degeneration, see § 5, p. 212), the size of the
cells is of great importance. We may mention further, that the finite
size hi thus found for a cell corresponds precisely to Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, according to which the position and momentum
of a particle cannot be more exactly defined than is consistent with
the relation ApAg ~h; in view of this relation, it would in fact be
quite meaningless to make a finer division of the phase space, as it
is impossible to decide by experiment in which of these cells a
particle lies.
We now return to the statistics of light quanta, and begin with
a verification of the statement made above, that the idea of light
quanta (together with the definition of the size of the cell by
quantum considerations) is not sufficient to enable us to deduce
Planck's formula, if we adhere to the Boltzmann
statistics. For,
according to Boltzmann's result, the number of quanta in a definite
sheet-which we shall characterize by a mean vs of the frequencies


===== PDF PAGE 0234 =====

206
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
of this sheet-is given by the product of the number gs of the cells
in this sheet and the Boltzmann factor Ae-kI
, so that
Ns = Age hulkI (Es = hovs).
The Boltzmann law of distribution was obtained, let us repeat (§ 6,
p. 9), as the most probable distribution of the particles of a gas (in
our case the light quantum gas) in the various sheets (called cells in
our earlier investigation), subject to the two subsidiary conditions
INg =n and InsEs = E when the number of particles and the total
energy are given.
For the distribution of energy in our light quantum
gas we therefore find
or
u, du =
which, apart from the factor A, is Wien's law, instead of the result
required by Planck's formula, viz.
1
u, dr =
c3
Thus we see that the classical statistical methods fail, not only in the
case when we deal with the statistics of cavity radiation from the
wave point of view (8 3, p. 201), but also when we try to set up a
statistical theory of the light quantum gas. The question therefore
arises of what changes must be made in the classical statistics in order
that it may become possible to deduce Planck's radiation law by
purely statistical reasoning, without making use of the roundabout
road by way of an absorbing and emitting oscillator.
We see in the first place that for I small, ie. for hulkI » 1, our
formula would agree with Wien's approximation (valid in this case)
to Planck's law, provided we took A = 1. What does the condition
A = 1 signify? If we go back to the proof of Boltzmann's law of
distribution, we easily see that the value of the coefficient A follows
from the first subsidiary condition (fixed number of particles). If
this subsidiary condition were dropped, we would get A = 1; the
radiation formula which we have just deduced would then agree
asymptotically with the correct formula. We must conclude therefore
that the first condition does not hold for light quanta. A special reason
justifying this conclusion is that for large quanta of energy, ie. for
large values of hu/kI, our method of proof (if only on account of the


===== PDF PAGE 0235 =====

VII]
BOSE-EINSTEIN STATISTICS
207
correspondence principle) must give the correct result. Moreover, we
can see at once that there is good reason for dropping the first sub-
sidiary condition (fixed number of particles) in the case of light quanta;
for of course in every emission process in an atom a new light quantum
is formed, and in every absorption process one is absorbed and con-
verted into other forms of energy.
But even this assumption is not sufficient by itself to allow Planck's
formula to be established on a statistical foundation. We must in fact
completely alter the statistical foundation itself, and set up & new
quantum statistics". The way in which this might be done was shown
by Bose (1924) and improved by Einstein. They assume complete
indistinguishability of the light quanta. The hypothesis is i very
plausible one. Suppose the light quanta to be numbered in a certain
order. If light quantum l is in the cell 2, and light quantum 2 in the
cell 22, this distribution obviously represents the same state as the distri-
bution in which light quantum 1 is in the cell 7z, and light quantum 2
in the cell z, while the distribution of the rest of the light quanta re-
mains as before; for the two light quanta of course only difter from
each other in just this, that one of them is in the first cell and the other
in the second. Numbering or individualization of the separate light
quanta is entirely meaningless, since the state is completely and
uniquely described by merely specifying how many light quanta there
are in cell z, how many in cell 2z, and so on. This means, however, an
essential distinction as compared with the classical statisties. In the
latter, two cases, either of which passes into the other by merely
interchanging two light quanta, are counted in the onumeration of
states as two difterent states, whereas now thoy represent the samo
state, and in the enumeration of states must be counted as only i
single state.
We shall consider the subject from the mathematical standpoint,
and that with just so much greater generality that in the first place
we shall speak of particles in general, and not specially of light quanta
alone. We have already seen in connexion with the statement of
Pauli's principle (§ 5, p. 159) that there also it does not matter which
precise electron is at this placo or that; the second half of Pauli's
principlo was simply this, that the interchange of two electrons does
not change the state of the system as a whole, so that two distributions,
which only differ in respect of the interchange of two electrons, ropre-
sent one and the same state.
From the standpoint of wave mechanics every particle, a light
quantum included, is described by the specification of its proper func-


===== PDF PAGE 0236 =====

208
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
tion; let the proper function of one particle (the first) be 4".
, that
of a second yi, of a third 4m)
, and so on; where k, 6, m, ... repre-
sent the state of the particle in question (in the case of light quanta,
e.g., ke stands for the three quantum numbers k, liz, kg). The state as
a whole is then described (to a first approximation at least, neglecting
mutual action between individual particles) by the product of these
proper functions, i.e. by a proper function
ЧFrm...
=4744243)
....
If two particles are now interchanged, e.g. particle 1 and particle 2,
another wave function is obtained,
TTm =4(24241m(3)
which obviously corresponds to the same value of the energy of the
whole system, viz. to
We obtain other wave functions, for the same value of the energy,
by taking an arbitrary linear combination of those wave functions
which arise from the one first written down by a permutation of the
individual particles among themselves, ie. by interchange of the
arguments 1, 2, 3 of the separate functions:
4 trm..
=201281-476424m
• ...
where the sum is to be taken over all permutations P of these argu-
ments, and the factors 0y23 •.. represent arbitrary constant coefficients.
In the sense of classical statistics these wave functions give as
many different states as there are linearly independent wave functions
among them.
From the standpoint of the new statistics, however,
those cases which arise from one another by mere permutation of
particles belong to the same state. Hence the wave function which
describes this state cannot change when the particles are permuted,
or at most it can only change in its sign, since only quadratic forms,
such as T', are of any account so far as physical interpretation
is concerned. Now it is easily seen that the only wave function of
the form specified above, which does not change when the particles are
permuted, is the one in which all the coefficients are equal to 1, i.e.
the symmetrical wave function
....


===== PDF PAGE 0237 =====

VII]
BOSE-EINSTEIN STATISTICS
209
Another possibility, in which the sign of the wave function changes,
but not the value of its square, is the antisymmetrical form
F=43434m3
...
where the + sign is to be taken for an even permutation of the pa.
ticles, the - sign for an odd permutation. This antisymmetrical form
is known from the theory of determinants— it is the expansion of the
determinant
47(1)
43(2)
47(3)
42(1)
4(2)
4(8)
4a =
(2)
m(3)
..
No other functions exist which satisfy the requirement of indistin-
guishability.
We note further a special feature in the case of the antisymmetric
function. We know that a determinant vanishes if two rows, or two
columns, are the same; hence if two functions 4 and y are equal,
the determinant vanishes, and with it the wave function of this state,
i.e. this state does not exist. This is neither more nor less than Pauli's
principle, that two electrons cannot be in the same state (i.e. cannot
have their 4x the same).
There are therefore only two possible ways of describing a state by
a wave function, viz. either by the symmetrical or the antisymmetrical
wave function; the second possibility corresponds to Pauli's principle,
the first is another, and entirely different matter. If we count the
possible states on the basis of their wave functions (i.e. of the possible
wave functions which are linearly independent), two different statistics
present themselves. If we confine ourselves to the symmetrical wave
functions (without Pauli's principle), we get the so-called Bose-
Einstein statistics; if we describe the state by the antisymmetric func-
tion (with Pauli's principle), we get the Fermi-Dirac statistics (1926).
Which of the two statistics we are to use in a particular case, it must
be left to experience to decide. With regard to electrons, we already
know that they obey Pauli's principle-we shall therefore deal with
them tentatively by the Fermi-Dirac statistics (soe § 6, p. 214); on the
other hand, it turns out that we have to treat light quanta (Bose) and
also gas molecules (Einstein) according to the Bose-Einstein statistics.
We proceed now to work out the latter type of statistics. In the
first place we have to count the number of different states (i.e. of


===== PDF PAGE 0238 =====

2IO
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
linearly independent wave functions). In carrying out the enume-
ration, however, we use, not the wave picture, but the corpuscular
picture, and have to find the number of distinguishable arrangements
of the particles in a sheet, for the case of the Bose-Einstein statistics.
For this purpose, we denote the individual cells of this sheet by z1.
22..., Ig; the number of them is, by definition, given by the weight
factor gs of this sheet. On the other hand, let there be n, particles in
this sheet, which for the present we denote individually by ay, 0z, ...,
ans We have to distribute these particles among the g, cells of the sheet,
and determine the number of distinguishable arrangements. To this
end, we describe a definite arrangement in the following way. We write
down, purely formally, the elements z and a in an arbitrary order, e.g.
# 022037399C677O...,
with the understanding that the particles standing between two z's
are in each case supposed to be in the cell which stands to their left in
the sequence; the sequence written down above means therefore that
the particles a and du are in the cell z, the particle as in the cell 2z,
the particles az, Us, de in the cell zg, no particle in in, and so on; that
being so, the first letter in the symbolic arrangement must obviously
be a 2. We therefore obtain all possible arrangements, by first setting
down a z at the head of the sequence-which can be done in g, different
ways and then writing down the remaining 93 - 1 + ns letters in
arbitrary order one after the other. The total number of these arrange-
ments is therefore
9s(9s + ns - 1)!.
Distributions which can be derived from one another by mere permu-
tation of the cells among themselves, or of the particles among them-
selves, do not, however, represent different states, but one and the
same state; the number of these permutations is 9s! Ng! We thus obtain
for the number of distinguishable arrangements in the sheet which is
characterized by the inders, in the case of the Bose-Einstein statistics,
9s(9s + ng - 1)!.
. (9s + Ng - 1)!
9s! Ng!
(9s - 1)! ng!
Altogether, the number of distingushable arrangements for the case
when there are n particles in the first sheet, n, particles in the second,
and so on, is given by the product of expressions of the above type, for
the sheets:
s. (9s - 1)! Ng!


===== PDF PAGE 0239 =====

VII]
BOSE-EINSTEIN STATISTICS
2II
We call this the "probability" of that distribution of the particles
among the various sheets which is defined by the numbers ny, Na, ... .
It takes the place here of the probability found in the Boltzmann
statistics (p. 12), viz.
W=
.. .
The remaining part of the calculation proceeds as at the place cited.
We have to determine the most probable distribution; for this purpose
we use Stirling's theorem, and write
10g W = I{(9s +ng) 10g(93+ns) -93 loggs -nologns},
where we have neglected the 1 in comparison with the large numbers
9s and Ns. We must now make log W a maximum for variations of ng,
subject to the subsidiary condition
INgEs = E, (Es = hvs).
s
For light quanta, as we have shown above (p. 206), the second sub-
sidiary condition (constancy of number of particles) drops out. Thus
we find in the usual way
ans
or
Ng
The Bose-Einstein law of distribution for light quanta therefore runs
(if we drop the index s)
n = -
this gives for the energy density
This is just Planck's radiation formula, if we put p = 1/kT. The
justification for this last step is given by thermodynamics; according
to Boltzmann, S = klogW is to be regarded as the entropy, and it
can then be shown (see Appendix XXIX, p. 336) that from the
equation IdS = dQ we can infer that ß = 1/kT (dQ is the increment


===== PDF PAGE 0240 =====

212
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
of the heat content, or, at constant volume, of the energy content of
the light quantum gas). From the Bose-Einstein statistics, therefore,
Planck's radiation law can be deduced in a way to which no objection
can be taken.
5. Einstein's Theory of Gas Degeneration.
After the brilliant success of the Bose-Einstein statistics with the
light quantum gas, it was a natural suggestion to try it in the kinetic
theory of gases also, as a substitute for the Boltzmann statistics. The
investigation, which was undertaken by Einstein (1925), is based
on the hypothesis that the molecules of a gas are, like light quanta,
indistinguishable from each other.
The calculations run exactly as in the light. quantum case, except
that here a second subsidiary condition appears, on account of the
conservation of the number of particles:
En, = N.
The determination of the probability of a definite distribution
My, Nz,... follows the same lines as before. The calculation of the
most probable distribution leads now, owing to the presence of the
second subsidiary condition, to the equation
a 1og W
= loggs + No = a + Ben
ans
or, on dropping the suffix s,
n =-
eat Be - 1'
where again B = 1/kT (see Appendix XXIX, p. 336). Here the
number g of cells in a sheet can be expressed by the corresponding
energy; we have of course
€= Imp, and de=
- pap,
m
where p is the momentum of the particles; the expression for g obtained
above therefore becomes
ATV
V2m'e de.


===== PDF PAGE 0241 =====

VII] EINSTEIN'S THEORY OF GAS DEGENERATION
2I3
We thus find the Bose-Einstein law of distribution for atoms:
dN = F(E) VEdE
=
(B=1/kT),
while the law of distribution given by the Boltzmann statistics was
(p. 15)
'e-(m/2) (u3/kT)y=dv
e-elkIVede.
(IN is the number of particles in the volume V, n the number per unit
volume.)
The quantity a is of course determined from the subsidiary con-
dition
JaN = F(e)Vede=N= nV.
The constant a, or more usually A = e is called the degeneracy
parameter, the reason for the name being as follows. If a is very great,
and therefore A very small (compared to 1), we can neglect the 1 in
the denominator in comparison with ete
= eB/A (since of course
Be is always positive); thus in this case we obtain
aN = (ATV/h3)V/2m V Ede Ae-Be
i.e. the classical distribution law (Maxwell); here A = e * is deter-
mined at once from the subsidiary condition of constancy of the number
of particles. We thus find (p. 15; Appendix I, p. 259)
A =
If then A is very small compared to 1, the Bose-Einstein distribution
formula passes over into the classical one. It is otherwise in the case
when A becomes comparable with 1 (the case of A > 1, i.e. a < 0,
cannot occur, for then the denominator vanishes for the energy value
€ = —a/B, and for smaller values of e becomes negative, so that the
whole theory becomes meaningless); if A ~1, deviations from
the classical properties occur; we say then that the gas is degenerate.
In this case the subsidiary condition leads to a transcendental equation
(E 908)
15


===== PDF PAGE 0242 =====

214
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
for A, which can be solved by expanding in ascending powers of
, the expansion beginning with the expression given
above for the limiting case A « 1:
nh'
A =
By substituting particular values of the constants n, m and I we can
read off from this equation whether under these conditions the gas is
degenerate or not. We see in the first place quite generally that A
increases,
and accordingly the degeneracy becomes greater as n
increases, i.e. as the density increases; on the other hand, it diminishes
with increasing temperature and atomic weight. To take a special
example: for hydrogen gas under normal conditions (for T = 300° K.,
n ~ 3•1010 cm. 3) approximately A ~3•10<1; for heavy gases
A becomes still smaller; gases are therefore never degenerate at normal
temperatures and pressures, but behave according to the classical
laws. Degeneracy would only become noticeable at unattainably low
temperatures or at extremely high pressures, that is to say, in regions
in which even according to the classical statistics the gases no longer
behave as ideal gases (influence of finite size of the particles, conden-
sation of the gas, &c.). Thus the Bose-Einstein statistics, when applied
to gases, in the region in which the kinetic theory of gases is valid, shows
practically no differences as compared with the classical statistics of
Boltzmann.
6. Fermi-Dirac Statistics.
We have shown in § 4 (p. 209) that the introduction of the principle
of indistinguishability into statistics leads to two, and only two, new
systems of statistics, one of which, the Bose-Einstein statistics, we have
discussed in detail in the last two sections (light quanta, gas mole-
cules). We turn now to the second possible statistics, which is based
on Pauli's principle, and was introduced by Fermi and Dirac. We
have seen in § 4 (p. 209) that this statistics is intimately connected
with the employment of Pauli's principle, observing that the proper
function of a state in which two electrons have the same partial proper
function (with respect to the four quantum numbers, including the
spin quantum number) automatically vanishes.
To deduce the nature of this statistics, we shall use the model of
a gas consisting of electrons, which, on the experimental evidence of
spectra, obey Pauli's principle. In this case again, our first aim is to
find the distribution of the electrons over the individual cells, bearing in


===== PDF PAGE 0243 =====

VII]
FERMI-DIRAC STATISTICS
2I5
mind, however, that there are now twice as many cells as in the previous
case of gas atoms, in consequence of the two possible settings of the
spin; on the other hand, no cell can be occupied by more than one
electron, or, in other words, the " occupation numbers" of the cells
in this case must be either 0 or 1. (We might of course proceed on
the assumption that the number of cells in each sheet is only half
as great, but in compensation for this provide two possible places
for the electrons in each cell, corresponding to the two directions of
spin.)
We begin as before with the enumeration of the distinguishable
distributions. Let the number of electrons in the sth sheet be ns, these
being distributed over the gs cells of this sheet; of these gs cells, ng are
therefore (singly) occupied (1), and gs - Ng are empty (0). We charac-
terize such a distribution by assigning to each cell its occupation
number:
73 74 25 76 Z7 28 29
ZIO
100II101
or by specifying the cells which are occupied by no particle, and those
occupied by 1:
0
1
Z Z9 210
...
21 74 25 26 28
. ...
Clearly there are g! such distributions, corresponding to the permu-
tations of the gs cells z in this scheme. But the same state (as regards
occupation) is denoted by all distributions among these, which only
differ from one another by permutation of the n, occupied cells, or of
the gs - Ns unoccupied cells. Hence the "probability" of a distri-
bution characterized by the occupation numbers ng, No, Ng... for the
individual cells is given by
9s!
W = П -
or, from Stirling's theorem, by
TOST=E91059-1,10540-190--10)108l9-n0)).
As before, we wish to find the most probable distribution subject to
the two subsidiary conditions
Ins = N,
EngEs = E.


===== PDF PAGE 0244 =====

216
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
We obtain it in the usual way:
a log W--logn, + 10g(96-n.)
Ons
=108% - Me = at Ben.
gs
Ng =-
eatBes + 1'
i.e., except for the + sign in the denominator, the same formula as in
the case of the Bose-Einstein statistics. This difference of algebraic
sign, however, carries with it a fundamental distinction between the
present case and that of the Bose-Einstein statistics, in that a can now
have all values from -o to to, and the degeneracy parameter
A = e- all values therefore from 0 to + co; for the denominator of
the distribution function is here always greater than 1. If we now
Fermi-Dirac law of distribution:
(8 = 1/kT).
The degeneracy parameter is determined as before from the first sub-
sidiary condition:
JaN =S F(e)Vede = N= nV.
This transcendental equation for A can be solved, in the case when
A « 1, by means of a power expansion, as before (p. 214):
nhỏ
A=.
- (2mmkT) - 3/2 + ... (A <1).
When A is extremely small, this case, it is easy to see, passes over into
the classical statistics. In the case when A > 1, we find an approxi-
mate expansion of the form (which we merely state, without proof):
+... (A»1);
this is the case of degeneracy of the electron gas. A more thorough
discussion of these formula is given in the next section, where at the


===== PDF PAGE 0245 =====

VII]
FERMI-DIRAC STATISTICS
217
same time the most important application of the Fermi-Dirac statistics
will be dealt with.
7. Electron Theory of Metals. Energy Distribution.
In the preceding section we spoke of an "electron gas", and
pictured it to ourselves as a definite number (n per cm.3) of electrons,
moving freely, without mutual disturbance. Such a case is of course
unrealizable, since in virtue of their electric charge the electrons will
always act upon each other; however, to a first approximation we
can neglect this disturbing action, owing to the neutralizing effect of
the positive ions.
Now such an approximately free electron gas exists in the interior
of a metal. In proof of this statement, we may cite the high con-
ductivity of metals; and metallic conduction is carried on by electrons
only, since, in contrast to electrolytic conduction, it is demonstrably
not bound up with transport of matter. In order to secure that the
electrons shall be able to react to an external electric field in such a way
that the resulting conductivity shall be as high as it is, they must at
least approximately be able to move freely in the metal, in contrast
to what happens in non-conductors, in which the electrons are firmly
bound to the atoms. Founding on these ideas, even the older theories
of metallic conduction (Riecke, Drude, Lorentz, since 1900) were
able to give a satisfactory explanation of the Wiedemann-Franz law,
which states that the electrical and thermal conductivities are propor-
tional to one another, and that their ratio is inversely proportional to
the absolute temperature. The older theories, however, consistently
led to difficulties in regard to the explanation of the specific heat of
metals. It is established by experiment that metals obey the Dulong-
Petit law, i.e. that their specific heat, referred to 1 mole, is 6 cals/degree.
This could be explained at once, if the temperature of the metal were
determined solely by the vibrational energy of the atoms in the lattice,
since the mean energy per lattice point is 3kT. But to explain the
process of conduction and other related phenomena it is necessary to
assume that to every atom (ion) there corresponds approximately one
free electron. The free electrons take part in the thermal motion
in the metal, and in fact (as shown by the Wiedemann-Franz law)
are largely responsible for the high thermal conductivity of metals.
According to classical statistics, every free electron in the metal would
therefore possess the mean kinetic energy 3kT, and the specific heat of
the metal would then be, per atom, not 3k, but of the order (3 + 3/2) i,
i.e. referred to 1 mole, 9 cals/degree, which is contrary to the facts.


===== PDF PAGE 0246 =====

218
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
The solution of this difficulty is due to Pauli and Sommerfeld (1927),
who pointed out that the laws of classical statistics ought not to be
applied to the electron gas within a metal, since it is bound to behave
as a degenerate gas. Thus, since the mass of the electron is 1840 times
smaller than that of the hydrogen atom, it follows that, at room tem-
perature (T = 300º) and an electronic density of n ~ 3•1019, corre-
sponding to a gas density at a pressure of 1 atmosphere, the value of
the degeneracy parameter Ag for the electron is
Ag=Ag4(1840)3/2=A,4104~1-2,
where Am is the degeneracy parameter for hydrogen gas under the
same conditions; even in this case, therefore, A is of the order of magni-
tude 1. Values decidedly greater than this are found for the electron
gas in metals. In silver the number of atoms per cm.3 is n = 5.9 X 1022.
Since, as we have already remarked, we must assume that roughly
speaking there is one free electron for each atom, we find for this value
of n by the first approximate formula that A is about 2300; in this
case, therefore, the gas is degenerate to a high degree. For a value of
A so high as this, it is true, it is not permissible to apply the first
approximate formula, and we must use the second; but even this
gives the still high value A ~210. The electron gas in metals is there-
fore in all cases highly degenerate its properties are essentially
different from those of an ordinary gas.
The most important characteristics of the Fermi-Dirac distri-
bution function are the slightness of the dependence of distribution
on temperature, and the occurrence of a zero-point energy. The latter
property is closely connected with the Pauli principle. In the classical
gas theory the absolute zero is characterized by the fact that the mean
kinetic energy of the gas particles vanishes at that temperature, and
accordingly the energy of every individual particle also vanishes;
classically, therefore, at the absolute zero the gas particles are at rest.
It is different in the Fermi-Dirac statistics; here each cell can only
have a single occupant; in the state of lowest energy, all the cells of
small energy are occupied, and the limit of the "filling up" of the
system of cells is given by the number of electrons. We characterize
this limit by the momentum po of that cell, up to which the filling up
reaches; it is found from the formula deduced above for the number
of cells:
ATV
2
3h8 Po° = N,


===== PDF PAGE 0247 =====

VII]
ELECTRON THEORY OF METALS
219
or
P0 = h
3(87) = 5n
The limiting energy e is then given by
h?
2m
= 5-77 × 10-27 n2/3 ergs = 3•63 × 10-15 n2/3 electron volts.
We therefore obtain the following distribution curve for the electrons
at the absolute zero (see fig. 7). Taking the electronic energy € as
abscissa, and as ordinate the previously (p. 216) defined distribution
function F(e), whose product by the factor Vede gives the number
of electrons with energy values between e
and e + de, we find for the graph a rectangle;
F(E)
up to the energy value e the cells are com-
Fig. 7.—Fermi's distribution curve.
The continuous, sharp
ornered line corresponds to the absolute zero (T= o). th
dotted line to a temperature other than zero.
pletely filled, the cells with greater energy values are empty. In this
case the degeneration parameter A, as the approximate formula shows,
becomes infinitely great, as 1/T in fact; comparison with the fore-
going formula for the limiting energy shows that we can put approxi-
mately
Este
a=-
KT
The distribution function, which is approximately valid for large
values of A, i.e. for low temperatures, is then
87V
V 2m3
F (€) =
and for the limiting case when T → 0, gives the graph of fig. 7. When
& < Eo, the exponential function in the denominator vanishes when
I → O, and we have E(e) = SnVV2m3/h8; when e > Eo, however,
the exponential function in the denominator becomes infinite, and
F(e) vanishes.
As the temperature increases, the electrons are gradually raised
into higher states; but the change in the electronic distribution will
at first only take effect at the place where the Fermi function falls


===== PDF PAGE 0248 =====

220
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
away, and that by slowly rounding off the corners of the distribution
curve, as indicated in fig. 7. The main body of the electrons, however,
is left untouched by the rise of temperature. For not too high tem-
peratures, therefore, only a vanishingly small fraction of the electrons
takes part in the thermal motion, so that the specific heat of the
electrons is very small. It is only when high temperatures are reached
(of the order of 10 degrees C.), far above room temperature, that the
tight packing of the electrons in the deeper states gradually becomes
loosened, and we obtain a noticeable contribution from the electrons
to the specific beat of metals.
8. Thermionie and Photoelectric Effect in Metals.
A further proof of the correctness of the idea of free electrons in
metals and of the applicability of the Fermi-Dirac statistics is furnished
by the phenomenon of thermionic
Fig. 8.-Diagram of the potential relations in
a metal; the potential hollow is partly " filled up"
V
with electrons.
emission. It is known that electrons emerge spontaneously from
incandescent metals (e.g. glowing cathodes), and that these electrons
in the absence of an applied potential form an electronic cloud
or atmosphere round the incandescent body. Their number can
be determined by measuring the current set up when an external
E.M.F. is applied. Theoretically, the phenomenon of thermionic
emission has to be pictured in the following way (fig. 8). Within
the metal the electrons can certainly move freely, but in general
their escape from the metal is opposed by a potential barrier, which
is called the work function, ta.
At higher temperatures,
how-
ever, it may happen that the energy of an electron becomes greater
than ea, so that it can escape from the metal. Using the formula of
the Fermi-Dirac statistics, we can determine the number of electrons
emerging in this way per unit time; the current is found to be
while the classical statistics gives for it the expression (Richardson,
1902)
/kT
z = en


===== PDF PAGE 0249 =====

VII] THERMIONIC AND PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
22I
which, regarded as a function of the temperature, differs somewhat
from that given by the new theory (see Appendix XXX, p. 338).
The two formula differ both in the power of I before the exponential
function, and in the meaning of the constant in the exponent. To test
them, it is usual to graph y = logi against x = 1/T, i.e. the function
Classical
Fermi Statistics
A = log (en V k/2mm)
y=A - a log -bx
log (ATemk?/h3)
6 = €a/k
(Ea - Eo)/t
2
Now the term a logx is in general so small compared to the other two
terms, that it has been impossible up till now to decide whether the
quantum theory formula with a = 2 is superior to the classical one
with a =½. On the other hand, the constant b is easily found, for,
when the term a log is omitted, the equation y = A - bx represents
a straight line, and b is its gradient. We can therefore determine the
difference kb = Ea - € experimentally for various metals, and from
this calculate a by substituting for e the value given by theory,
viz. O for the classical, and 3-63 × 10-15p2/3 electron volts for the
quantum theory.
By comparing the values thus found for a with other measure-
ments, it has been definitely settled that the quantum theory formula
is correct, and not the classical one.
We can in fact determine the work function ea in another way
which is quite different, viz. by means of diffraction experiments with
slow electrons. When a crystal lattice is irradiated with cathode
rays, the electrons, as we know, are difiracted by the lattice, the
position of the diffraction maxima depending upon the de Broglie
wave-length 1 = h/p of the electrons. When, however, the cathode
ray enters the crystal, refraction occurs at the surface, since the kinetic
energy of the electrons in the solid is greater, and therefore their wave-
length smaller, than in the external space.
As in optics, so here we
can speak of a refractive index of the crystal with respect to electrons;
this in fact, as in the optical case, being given by the ratio of the wave-
lengths inside and outside; these are, if we reckon the energy from
the bottom of the potential trough,
h
h
Moutside =
-=-
Pa
V/ 2m (E - Ea)
Minside =
--=
Pi
V2mE


===== PDF PAGE 0250 =====

222
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
so that we find for the refractive index the expression
n = outsido =
€
Tinsido
€ — Ea
By measurement of the position of diffraction maxima we can now
determine the value of the refractive index and so, knowing e, calculate
the work function a For the sake of greater accuracy, we should
choose e very small, i.e. use slow electrons.
Careful measurements of this kind by Davisson and Germer on
single crystals of nickel gave e. ~ 16 election volts. On the other
hand, measurements on the thermionic effect give values of bhi in the
region of 1 electron volts, in disagreement with the classical formula,
according to which we should have bk = e. The quantum theory,
however, gives €o = 11-7 electron volts, if we assume that in nickel
two electrons per atom are free, in accordance with the fact that nickel
has two valency electrons. This would give ea - €0 = 4-3 electron
volts, in good agreement with the results of measurement of thermionic
emission. Measurements on a series of elements with respect to their
refractive index have been carried out by Rupp, who found that we
get good agreement between theory and experiment, if for the elements
Cu, Ag, Au, Fe, Mo and ZI we assume two free electrons per atom, for
Al 3, for Pb 3 or 4, while for K the number of free electrons per atom
must be less than 2. But we cannot attach great weight to this
agreement, seeing that we have made the rather rough approximation
of treating the potential inside the metal as constant.
The same constants as occur in the theory of thermionic emission
also determine the photoelectric effect, which sets in at the frequency
given by hy = ta - to, at which the energy of the incident light
quantum is just sufficient to raise the electron from the limiting point
of the Fermi distribution, eo, to the height of the external potential.
The same constants also determine the law of the cold discharge, in
which the following state of aflairs occurs. If by means of sharp points
very high field strengths (106 volts/cm.) are produced at the surface
of a metal, electrons issue from the metal even though the temperature
has not been raised. The explanation depends on the same principle
as is applied in the theory of radioactive disintegration of the nucleus
p. 182, and Appendix XXVI, p. 326). The external field implies
a potential distribution in which the potential falls linearly from the
surface outwards. We have therefore a potential barrier (fig. 9) at the
surface of the metal, and we know that according to wave mechanics
an electron can make its way through such a barrier. The greater


===== PDF PAGE 0251 =====

VII] THERMIONIC AND PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
223
the external field, the narrower becomes the barrier, and therefore
the greater becomes the number of electrons issuing per second. This
number clearly depends on the height of the original potential above
the zero-point level ea - eo, so that the number, if it could be found
experimentally, would allow the
value of ta — eo to be deter-
mined. The experiment, how-
ever, is impracticable, owing
to the presence of minute in-
Fig. 9.—Potential barrier at the surface of a metal.
equalities and impurities in the
surface, which change the magnitude of the field in an uncontrollable
way; at every little projection the field is greater than the mean
potential gradient. In point of fact, electrons begin to emerge at
distinctly smaller field strengths than would be expected if the surface
were ideally smooth.
9. Magnetism of the Electron Gas.
Another circumstance which confirms the correctness of our ideas
about electrons in metals was pointed out by Pauli (1927). The elec-
trons possess on account of their spin a magnetic moment equal to a
Bohr magneton. As, according to our present picture, they behave
in metals practically like free particles, one might expect, therefore,
that they should cause a very strong paramagnetism. Experiment
shows, however, that simple metals (e.g. Li, Na) are either not para-
magnetic, or only very slightly so. Pauli explains this as follows.
We can consider the valency electrons in the metal as free; the ions
forming the residue, having an inert gas configuration of electrons,
are non-magnetic. Of the free electrons (for T = 0), two sit in
every cell, and they have opposite spins, so that their magnetic
moments exactly balance each other. If
an external field H is
applied, the electrons will tend to direct their spins parallel to the
field, which they cannot do without leaving the doubly occupied
cells and jumping into higher states. This increase in kinetic energy
goes on until it is compensated by the decrease of potential energy
due to the orientation in the field. As only a few electrons jump to
higher states, the paramagnetism is much smaller than for systems
not satisfying the exclusion principle of Pauli. When the tempera-
ture rises, the uppermost sheets of the Fermi distribution, as we have
shown in § 7 (p. 219), begin to be "loosened", individual electrons
being lifted out of the doubly occupied cells, so that now there are
cells which are only singly occupied. But this gives, as can be shown,


===== PDF PAGE 0252 =====

224
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
only a second order effect. Consequently the paramagnetism of an
electronic gas is almost independent of temperature. This is in agree-
ment with experiment. But now the orbital motions of the electrons.
also produce a magnetic effect diamagnetic indeed, as may be seen
at once. The theory of this phenomenon is not simple, and there
has been much discussion about it. From the standpoint of the
quantum theory, however, a definite formula results for the magnitude
of the diamagnetic moment. If we subtract this from the paramagnetic
moment, we get the following table:
TABLE V-SUSCEPTIBILITIES OF THE ALKALI METALS
Na
Rb
Cs
X. 107: Theory
4-38
3•40
3•26
3•02
x. 107: Experiment
5•8
5•1
0.6
—0•5
The agreement in order of magnitude is good. The differences, especially
in Rb, and in Cs (where the sign does not agree), can be explained as
due to the neglect of facts which should be considered. Thus, in the
heavy elements the inner electronic shells make an appreciable contri-
bution to the diamagnetism, and in all metals the assumption of entirely
free electrons is incorrect, as we proceed to explain more fully.
10. Electrical and Thermal Conductivity, Thermoelectricity.
To explain electrical conductivity, we must suppose the electrons
in a metal to have a "free path"
. In fact, if we were to adhere in
the problem of electrical conductivity to the idea of perfectly free
electrons (that this is only a first approximation we have already
emphasized above), the result would be an infinitely great conduc-
tivity. To explain finite resistance, therefore, we must take into account
the fact that the electrons, in the course of their motion through the
metal, collide from time to time with the ions of the lattice, and are
thus deflected from their path, or are retarded; the average distance
which an electron traverses between two collisions with the lattice
ions is called, by analogy with the similar case in the kinetic theory of
gases, the mean free path.
It has been shown by Sommerfeld (1928) that we can calculate the
general behaviour of electrical and thermal conductivities without
necessarily making special hypotheses as to the free path. The
Wiedemann-Franz law follows from this theory; and we can explain
in the same way the Joule heat, the Peltier and Thomson thermo-
electric effects, and other phenomena.


===== PDF PAGE 0253 =====

VII] ELECTRICAL AND THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY
225
The refinements of the theory, which have been worked out in particu-
lar by Houston, Bloch, Peierls, Nordheim, Fowler and Brillouin, have
two main objects. In the first place, the picture of perfectly free elec-
trons at a constant potential is certainly far too rough. There will be
binding forces between the residual ions and the conduction electrons;
we must elaborate the theory sufficiently to make it possible to deduce
the number of electrons taking part in the process of conduction, and
the change in this number with temperature, from the properties of
the atoms of the substance. In principle this involves a very com-
plicated problem in quantum mechanics, since an electron is not in this
case bound to a definite atom, but to the totality of the atomic residues,
which form a regular crystal lattice. The potential of these residues is
a space-periodic function (fig. 10), and the problem comes to this-
to solve Schrödinger's wave
equation for a periodic poten-
tial field of this kind. That
can be done by various ap-
proximate methods. One
thing is clear: if an electron
Fig. 10.- The potential in a crystal
lattice as a periodic function of position
in space.
has little energy, and so lies deep in a hollow, the probability of
its getting into another hollow is small; every hollow is isolated
from the rest. This gives discrete energy levels. On the other
hand, if an clectron has a great deal of energy, and therefore
is placed far above the level of all the hollows, it is practically free
and has & continuous spectrum associated with it. Actually it will
be a matter of energy strips which are narrow at the bottom and
become gradually broader towards the top; finally we may speak of a
continuum, with gaps always becoming narrower. We must remember,
however, that the arrangement is three-dimensional; it may happen,
therefore, that in one direction two neighbouring energy strips are
completely separate, but overlap in another. Whether and when this
happens, depends on the depth and arrangement of the potential
hollows; if they are shallow, even the deepest energy strips will be
broad, and in many directions run into one another.
These possible energy levels become filled up by electrons, two of
which always fall into each state, on account of the spin. It turns out
that such a strip contains exactly 2N electronic states, if N is the


===== PDF PAGE 0254 =====

226
QUANTUM STATISTICS
[CHAP.
number of the electrons. If therefore one free electron is available per
atom, as in the alkalies, IN in all, the lowest strip is not yet completely
occupied. The electrons will therefore be able to move freely, and we
get a good conductor. In the alkaline earths, where there are two
loosely bound electrons per atom, the first zone is completely filled.
We then have an insulator in the case of deep energy troughs, where
the next energy strip is completely separated from the lowest; but
a conductor, when the troughs are so shallow that the first two strips
overlap; for then both strips are practically empty, which means
that the electrons can move freely. In this way all gradations of
conductivity and its dependence on temperature can be explained
qualitatively, and there exists to-day a satisfactory theory of semi-
conductors (Fowler, Wilson).
We may mention one more phenomenon in metals, the Hall effect.
When a current is flowing in a wire in which there is a transverse
magnetic field, a potential difference occurs in the direction perpen-
dicular to both the field and the wire. In itself this is not difficult
to understand; for we know of course that a magnetic field exerts
on a moving electron a force perpendicular to the field and to the
velocity (Lorentz force, p. 26). What is remarkable is that in some
metals this potential difference has its sign reversed, as if we were
dealing with positive electrons. Positrons have now been discovered
of course, but it cannot be these which are concerned here— in presence
of so many negative electrons, their life is very short. But this anoma-
lous Hall effect can be understood if we assume that one of the per-
mitted energy strips is not completely filled up by (negative) electrons.
The theory then shows that the " gaps" which remain behave exactly
like free positive electrons.
We come now to the second main problem (cf. p. 224)-to deter-
mine by wave mechanics the free paths of the electrons-a problem
which cannot be solved by the classical theory; it is a question of the
scattering of the electronic waves which traverse the lattice of the
metal, by the ions situated at the lattice points; and of the trans-
ference of their energy to the ionic lattice. The calculation gives
thoroughly satisfactory results, bringing out correctly, for instance,
the way in which electrical resistance depends on temperature.
We
may specially mention the calculation of the conductivity of alloys by
Nordheim. It has been established experimentally that the resistance
of an alloy is not always a monotonic function of the ratio in which
the two components are mixed, but is generally greater for the
mixture than for either of the pure metals; the investigation by wave


===== PDF PAGE 0255 =====

VII] ELECTRICAL AND THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY
mechanics shows that in this matter an essential part is playeu
the interference of the electronic waves.
In conclusion, let it be also mentioned, however, that up till r
the theory is completely at a loss with regard to supra-conductivity,
that is to say, the fact that many metals at very low temperatures—
a few degrees above absolute zero-suddenly lose their resistance
(Kamerlingh-Onnes, 1911); if, for example, an electric current is in-.
duced in a wire ring of supra-conducting material at a sufficiently low
temperature, the current, in the absence of external disturbances, will
continue with undiminished strength for a whole day. From the
point of view of the theory, this phenomenon remains up to the
present rather perplexing.


===== PDF PAGE 0256 =====

CHAPTER VIII
Molecular Structure
1. Molecular Properties as an Expression of the Distribution of Charge
in the Electronic Cloud.
This last chapter will be devoted to the subject of molecula. strue-
ture. Our object in the first place will be to arrive at clear idens with
regard to two questions, viz. by what properties a molecule, from the
physical standpoint, is most conveniently characterized and described,
and how these properties can be determined experimentally. Only
after these points have been dealt with will we take up the question,
how the phenomenon of chemical binding can be understood and
explained physically.
A molecule consists of a number of heavy nuclei, the atomic
nuclei of the atoms or ions which form the molecule; round these nuclei
the electrons revolve. Just as in the case of atoms, so here we can speak
of an electron cloud. On account of the great difference between the
masses of the electrons and the nuclei, the motion of the electrons is
of course much more rapid than that of the nuclei-a circumstance
which simplifies the discussion very decidedly. If, for example, we are
investigating the motion of the electrons, we can to a first approximation
regard the nuclei as at rest, since they move very little during the
period of revolution of an electron. On the other hand, if we are
examining the motion of the molecule as a whole (rotations), or of the
individual atoms in the molecule relative to one another (vibrations),
we can obtain a good approximation to the results by replacing all
properties of the electronic motion by mean values; for during the
time which must elapse before the nuclei have undergone any appre-
ciable displacement from their original positions, the electrons make
a great many complete revolutions.
With regard now to special molecular properties, one of the first
importance is the distribution of charge in the molecule. As regards the
total charge, we must distinguish here, as in the case of atoms, between
neutral molecules and positive or negative ions. The charge distri-
228.


===== PDF PAGE 0257 =====

CHAP. VIII]
MOLECULAR PROPERTIES
229
bution itself is completely characterized by specifying on the one hand
the mutual distances of the nuclei, and on the other the charge density
p of the electrons. The latter can be regarded either classically as the
mean charge per unit volume obtained by averaging over the motion
of revolution of the electrons, or from the standpoint of wave mechanics
as the charge density given by probability waves as in the case of the
atom. The charge density on the one hand, in the case of equilibrium
due to the action of the electrical forces, determines the nuclear dis-
tances; on the other hand, by its external boundary it gives the mole-
cular volume v (from the standpoint of wave mechanics, in the case of
a neutral molecule, exactly as in that of a neutral atom, the charge
distribution falls off exponentially outwards, beyond a definite boun-
dary, so that the size of the charge cloud can be assigned with com-
parative exactness).
We can now consider the question of the electrical centroids of the
positive and the negative charges apart, that is to say, the electrical
centroid of the nuclei alone, and the electrical centroid of the electron
cloud alone. It may happen that the two points coincide, just as they
always do in individual atoms, where the positive centroid is identical
with the nucleus, and where also the centroid of the negative charge
cloud, on account of the central symmetry of its charge distribution,
always coincides with the nucleus. In general, however, the two cen-
troids will be distinct from each other; consequently the external
action of the molecule is like that of an electric dipole. In this case we
speak of a permanent electric dipole moment, and denote it by the vector
Do =Ler,
where the radius vectors v are the position vectors of the nuclei and
the electrons; the bar signifies averaging over the electronic motion,
and the sum is taken over all the nuclei and clectrons. If Po = 0, the
electrical behaviour of the molecule is determined to a first approxi-
mation by the quadrupole moment, defined by its components
0хх = Lexi
...9
Oxy = Lexy, ...;
this is a form exactly analogous to the mechanical moment of
inertia; we therefore also speak of the electrical moment of inertia. It
is a tensor, and as such can be represented by an ellipsoid (ellipsoid
of inertia).
If the molecule comes into an electric field, it is deformed, the
positive nuclei being attracted in the direction of the lines of force,
the negative electrons in the opposite direction. Consequently, even
(E 908)
16


===== PDF PAGE 0258 =====

230
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
when there is no permanent dipole moment, a dipole moment is
induced; to a first approximation its magnitude increases linearly
with the field strength, and it can be represented by the relation
p= aE,
where a is called the deformability or polarizability, and, as may
easily be seen, has the dimensions of a volume. For spherically sym-
metrical molecules a is of course a scalar, that is, a constant indepen-
dent of direction. In general, however, a depends on the direction,
and may then be regarded as a tensor and represented by an ellipsoid,
the ellipsoid of polarization. We may also mention the case where the
molecules can rotate freely (gases); the ellipsoids of polarization
corresponding to the individual molecules can then assume all possible
positions in space, so that when an external field is applied, a mean
polarization of the gas arises, which is given by p =àE; the mean
value à over all directions is all that matters in this case.
As determining elements of molecules, therefore, besides the total
charge e, the nuclear distances and the molecular volume, we have
also now before us the dipole and quadrupole moments, as well as the
polarizability. All these quantities (with the exception of e), however,
also depend more or less on the state of excitation of the molecule. Just
as in the case of atoms, so also in molecules there exist difterent elec-
tronic states, characterized by quantum numbers which in the following
sections we shall denote collectively byn. Moreover, the nuclear motion
has an effect, consisting on the one hand of a rotation of the whole
molecule, determined by the rotational quantum number i, and on
the other hand of a vibration of the nuclei relative to one another,
described by a vibrational quantum number s. With these different
states of motion we shall deal in detail in the pages which follow.
2. Experimental Determination of the Molecular Constants.
We now proceed to explain in detail how the molecular constants
enumerated in the preceding section can be determined experimentally.
There is first the molecular volume, the determination of which, when
neutral molecules are in question, can be effected by the methods of
the kinetic theory of gases, already referred to in Chapter I (viscosity,
free path, diffusion and direct measurement by molecular rays). The
following table shows some molecular diameters * so determined, in
Angströms:
* The concept "molecule" in the kinetic theory of gases includes "monatomic
molecule". Compare the concept " mole" (p. 3).


===== PDF PAGE 0259 =====

VIII]
MOLECULAR CONSTANTS
TABLE VI-DIAMETERS OF SOME MOLECULES, IN A.
He 1•9
H, 2-3
H,O
2•6
Ne 2•3
02
2-9
CO
3.2
A 2.8
N2 3•1
COz
3•2
Kr 3•2
C1, 3•6
C,H.
4•1
Xe 3•5
(CzH5)20 4•8
On account of their charge, the volume of ions has to be deter-
mined by other means. Two main methods have been used (Wasast-
jerna (1923), Goldschmidt (1926), Pauling (1927)). One deals with the
"grating spaces" in ionic lattices, in rock salt, for example. If we
assume that the molecules in crystal lattices are packed as tightly as
possible, then the grating space gives directly the sum of the radii
of the two ions, ie. in the rock salt cube, "Nat + ra-; for in the ionic
lattices the ions are arranged in such a way that a positive ion is always
surrounded by negative ions only, and conversely, so that the grating
space is actually equal to the sum of the radi of the two ions. It is
always only the sum of the two radii which we obtain in this way, not
the radii themselves; if we knew one radius, we could then calculate
all the rest. What we do is to measure grating spaces in crystals one
of whose ions we have reason to believe is very small, for example,
Lit; this has only two electrons, in the K shell, and will therefore
be distinctly smaller than, for example, the Cl ion with completely
filled K and L shells, and a full sub-shell (of 8 electrons) of the M
shell. The grating space in the Li+Cl- lattice will therefore be approxi-
mately equal to the radius of the Cl- ion.
The second method of determining ionic radii consists in measuring
ionic mobility in electrolytes; small ions will make their way through
the liquid more easily than large ones. The difficulty occurs in this
method, however, that water molecules become deposited (hydration)
on the ions, and so produce a deceptive appearance of substantially
greater ionic radii. Here we give another table, showing ionic diameters
of atomic ions, and for the sake of comparison we repeat the diameters
of the inert gases; atoms or ions with similar electronic configurations
are placed in the same row or column. We see that the negative ions,
which have an inert gas configuration with a smaller nuclear charge
than the corresponding inert gas, are larger than the latter, the reason
being of course that the electrons in these ions are more loosely bound,
so that their orbits have greater radii. A corresponding result, mutatis
mutandis, holds for the positive ions also.


===== PDF PAGE 0260 =====

MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
232
TABLE VII-DIAMETERS OF SOME ATOMIO IONS, IN A.
0--
2-6
s--
3•5
Se--
3•8
H-
2•5
2.7
CI-
3•6
Br
3•9
He
1•9
Ne
2-3
A
2.8
Kr
3.2
Lit
16
Nat
2-0
K+
2.7
Rb+
3•0
Bett
0•7
Mgtt.
1-6
Cat+
2.1
Sr++
2-5
B+++
Alt++ 1-2
Sot+t
1•7
Y+++
2•1
O++++
0.4
Sit+++ 0-8
Ti++++ 1•3
Zrtt+t 1-7
Ntt+++ 0.3
Pt++++0.7
The second property to be considered is the mean polarizability à.
Here we confine ourselves in the first instance to molecules without
permanent dipole moment. By definition, à represents that mean
dipole moment which is induced in a molecule by an electric field of
unit strength (at least in the case of molecules which can rotate freely);
the total polarization P, per unit volume (containing IN molecules),
in an external field E, is given by P=äNE. But, according to
electrodynamics, the polarization P is connected with Maxwell's dis-
placement vector D by the relation D = E + AmP; on the other hand,
by definition, D = eE, where e is the dielectric constant. In the case
of gases, where we can neglect the mutual action of the molecules,
these relations lead to the following equation connecting the dielectric
constant and the mean polarizability:
€ = 1 + ANa.
In liquids, where the induced moments of the molecules influence
each other, the relation is somewhat more complicated.
The dielectric constant can easily be measured by well-known
methods, for instance by determining the refractive index n of the
substance for long waves (infra-red), which by Maxwell's theory is,
as we know, connected with e in this limiting case by the relation
n → Ve. As has already been remarked, the whole line of argument
is valid only for substances free from dipoles. We give a short table
of mean polarizabilities for inert gases and atomic ions, forms of
similar structure being placed in the same row or column. We can
recognize here the same order of succession in the values as in the
prévious case of the diameters; this was to be expected, since of course
to a greater diameter there corresponds a smaller binding force on the
outer electrons, and accordingly a greater polarizability. We remark
specially that à has the dimensions of a volume; it is always in fact of
the same order of magnitude as the molecular volume.


===== PDF PAGE 0261 =====

VIII]
MOLECULAR CONSTANTS
233
TABLE VIII-MEAN POLARIZABILITIES OF INERT GASES AND
AToMIc IoNs. (The numbers denote à. 1024 cm.?.)
F-
0.99
C1- 3•05
Br- 417
I- 6•28
e 0-202
Ne
0.392
A
• 1•629
Kr 2•46
Xe 4•00
Lit 0.075
Nat
0-21
K+ 0•87
Rb+ 1•81
Cst 2•79
Mgt+
0.12
Srt + 1.42
Alt++
0-065
Sit +++ 0-043
The polarizability of some neutral atoms (H, Li, K, Cs) has been
recently determined by a method similar to the Stern-Gerlach experi-
ment (§ 7, p. 166), namely, by measuring the deflexion of a beam of
atoms in an inhomogeneous electric field (Stark, 1936). The results do
not agree very well with theoretical computations from atomic models.
We go on now to consider molecules with permanent dipole
moment Po. Here, in addition to the polarization effect just con-
sidered, we have also the influence of the electric field on this per-
manent moment. In the absence of an external field, the moments of
the individual molecules will have all possible direc-
tions, so that the gas is unpolarized. If an external
field is applied, this tends to turn the individual
dipoles round into the field direction (fig. I); this ten-
ig. I.-Couple exerted by an external electric field on a molecule wit
ermanent dipole momen
dency is opposed, however, by the thermal motion, which, as we have
already frequently remarked, always has a smoothing out effect, and in
this case acts in the sense of equal distribution of the dipole directions.
Exactly the same relations are present here as in paramagnetism,
where, as we have seen, it is a matter of the setting of the magnets
in the direction of the magnetic field. For that case (see Appendix
XXV, p. 322) we find a formula for the mean moment per unit volume,
the field strengths being supposed not too great; we can apply that
formula directly here, so that the polarization per unit volume due to
the permanent dipoles is given by
Npor
P=
- E.
3kT
This is additional to the polarization determined by the polarizability
of the molecules, and we therefore obtain a dielectric constant
3kT


===== PDF PAGE 0262 =====

234
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
where € stands for the dielectric constant for the case of a vanishing
permanent dipole moment. The value of the dielectric constant there-
fore depends on two concurrent effects, one purely electrostatic and
therefore independent of temperature, the other dynamical (orien-
tation of the dipole moments) and a function of the temperature
(Debye's law (1912), analogous to Curie's law for paramagnetism). By
determining e exactly as a function of the temperature, we can there-
fore separate these two effects, and so from a series of measurements
of the dielectric constant deduce the polarizability and the magnitude
of the permanent dipole moment. Here, however, it is taken for granted
that e is measured in the electrostatic way. For if we were to proceed
as above by determining the refractive index (for infra-red waves),
we should always be measuring the first effect only, that is, the one
dependent on the polarizability. This is due to the fact that the orien-
tation process in the dipole moments cannot follow the rapid vibrations
of the electric vector of the light wave; for this orientation requires
a rotation of the whole molecule and accordingly a motion of the
atomic nuclei, which on account of the great mass of the nuclei takes
place far too slowly to be appreciably affected by the rapidly varying
electric forces of the light wave. Hence here also we have
n → VE= VI+ AnNa,
so that a measurement of the refractive index always gives the polari-
zation effect only. This makes it possible to determine po by a par-
ticularly simple method; n is measured optically and e found from
it, e being then determined by a statical measurement at a known
temperature (Debye):
1m No.
€ — € = 3kI
We note further that the limitation to long waves is necessary in the
determination of the refractive index, in order to keep clear of the
region of "anomalous dispersion", which is roughly characterized
by the condition that the optical frequencies are of the same order of
magnitude as the classical orbital frequencies of the electrons. In
the long wave region, however, the electronic motion is much more
rapid than the light vibration, so that the action of the light on the
electrons depends only on the mean distribution of the electronic
charge, or the polarizability.
The results so obtained have recently been successfully verified
for some substances by direct deflection of a molecular beam (§ 7,


===== PDF PAGE 0263 =====

VIII]
MOLECULAR CONSTANTS
235
p. 17) in a non-homogeneous electric field (Estermann, 1928).
The following table contains a small selection from the very large
number of published determinations of moments:
TABLE IX-DIPOLE MOMENTS Or MOLECULES (in 1018 e.s.u.)
Carbon monoxide
.. Co
0.12
Carbon dioxide
CO.
0-0
Water
••
.. H20
1.8
Methane
••
CHA
0-0
Methyl chloride ..
.. CH3C1
1•9
Methylene chloride
.. CH2Cl2
1•6
Chloroform
.. CHCl
1•0
Carbon tetrachloride
.. CCL
0•0
With reference to this table we add some remarks. In general,
molecules of symmetrical structure, such as COz, CHa, CCI, &c., have
no dipole moment. Since H, possesses a dipole moment, its structure
cannot be symmetrical. At the
present time it is assumed to have
the form of an isosceles triangle (see
§ 6, p. 255). CO, as an asymmetric
molecule, has of course a dipole
moment. The series of chlorine com-
pounds between methane and car-
bon tetrachloride is interesting;
Fig. 2.- Structural formuke
of CH,, CHI,Cl
CH, Cla, and CHCly.
Methane is symmetric, and
therefore has no dipole moment; the other
three
compounds are asymmetrie, and more or less elec-
trically polar.
their structural formula are shown in fig. 2. We see that the highly
symmetric forms CH, and CCh, at the ends of the series have no
dipole; in the intermediate cases dipoles are present, the gradations
of which can be represented roughly in terms of " vectorial compo-
sition " of elementary dipoles.
We have already mentioned above that in the case of a gas free
from dipoles (Po==() the electric field arising from a molecule,
and consequently the interaction between the molecules, are deter-
mined by the quadrupole moment (electrical moment of inertia). This
therefore makes a contribution in this case to the cohesive forces which
act between the molecules, and which in gases find their expression
in the constants of the equation of state (eg. van der Waals' equation,
p. 20); they can be measured either by means of these constants or


===== PDF PAGE 0264 =====

236
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
from the latent heat of vaporization, &c. We do not consider this
further here, however, but merely refer to § 7, p. 255, where we shall
return to the matter.
We must add a remark with regard to polarizability. In what
• precedes we have taken account only of the mean value of a over all
directions— a procedure which, in the case of a gas, whose molecules
can rotate freely, is certainly permissible as a first approximation.
But by suitable experiments we can also determine the anisotropy
of the polarizability, and so also form for ourselves a picture of the
anisotropy of the electron cloud. We have already mentioned (p. 230)
that the polarizability is a tensor, and can be represented by the
so-called ellipsoid of polarization (see fig. 3). This has the following
properties. The three principal
E
axes of the ellipsoid, ay, az, ag, lie
Ez
Ap2
--
in the directions of the least and
greatest polarizability, and the
direction perpendicular to both of
0x2
these; if electric field strengths of
E,
- --
unit amount act in succession in
these three directions, the lengths
P,
ox,.
of the axes give the electrical
Fig. 3.-Diagram of the relative position of
feld and dipole moment in the case of an aniso-
tropic molecule.
dipole moments corresponding to the respective cases. If we now
let the unit electric field strength act obliquely to these three special
directions, we can determine the polarization of the molecule by
splitting up this field strength into its components in the three
special directions, and determining the polarization effects of these
three components separately; the total moment is then found by
vectorial addition, and it is clear that in general the direction of the
acting field strength does not agree with the direction of the induced
dipole moment.
This has a marked effect on the polarization relations in the case
of the scattering of light. Let us consider in the first place (see fig. 4)
the case of the isotropic molecule or atom (atoms are in this sense
always isotropic). If a light wave falls on this molecule, the electric
vector E of the light wave excites in the molecule an electric moment
P, which is parallel to the exciting field strength, and in phase with it;
a scattered wave is therefore emitted having the same frequency as


===== PDF PAGE 0265 =====

VIII]
MOLECULAR CONSTANTS
237
the primary light. If we observe the scattered light in a direction
perpendicular to the incident beam, we find that it is completely
polarized; this is easy to understand, for its electric vector, which is
determined by p, is always parallel to the vector E of the primary
beam. This is not so for the anisotropic molecule, in which, as we
have just seen, the induced dipole moment in general has a different
direction from the exciting electric vector. If in this case again we
observe the scattered light in a direction at right angles to the incident
beam, we find that it is no longer completely polarized, but only
partially; in the scattered light there now occurs a component of the
electric vector at right angles to the incident light vector E. If we
make an experiment with the polarization apparatus, we no longer
find, as we did before, a position of the
nicol for which the field of view is com-
E
pletely dark. In this case we speak of the
depolarization of the scattered light (Born
a
(1917), Cabannes, Gans). By measuring the
degree of depolarization, we can draw con-
clusions with regard to the anisotropy of
the polarizability; for example, in the case
of axisymmetric molecules (in which two of
Fy a pandariopin due the ninto dif the polarint
ibrates in the direction of the electric vector of the light wave
5) In an anisotropic molecule it vibrates obliquely to E, an
causes depolarization in the scattered light.
the axes of the ellipsoid of polarization become equal: a = az), we
can find, as an exact analysis shows, the value of az — a1. Since we
can determine the mean polarizability by other measurements, we
obtain in this way complete information regarding the lengths of the
axes of the ellipsoid of polarization.
The same result can be obtained from the Kerr effect (1875). In a :
statical field E, even in the absence of a permanent dipole moment
(Po = 0), anisotropic molecules are subjected to a couple, since the
direction of the induced dipole moment does not fall in the field
direction. This couple is again in the present case opposed by the
thermal motion, which tends to produce a uniform distribution of
direction, so that the molecules become partially oriented in the field
direction, to an extent dependent on the temperature (Langevin, 1905;
Born, 1916). But it can be shown that such a substance behaves
towards light passing through it exactly like a doubly refracting


===== PDF PAGE 0266 =====

238
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
uniaxial crystal. In this case, again, measurement of the double refrac-
tion gives for axisymmetric molecules the value of ag - ay (Gans
(1921), Cabannes, Raman, Stuart). We may remark further that the
effect in question is much employed in modern technical work; it is
the basis of the Kerr cell (Carolus), extensively used in television
technique as a light relay.
We come now to the determination of the distances between the
nuclei, the frequencies of the nuclear vibrations, and other molecular
properties connected with the nucleus. Here optical methods of a
special sort play a part which we shall consider in next section.
3. Band Spectra and the Raman Efiect.
We disregard in the first place the relative motions of the nuclei.
A diatomic molecule, so far as its mass distribution is concerned, can
be pictured as a nearly rigid dumb-bell, since of course the electrons
by reason of their vanishingly small mass form an inappreciable factor
in the mass distribution. This dumb-bell can turn round an axis fixed
in space, and so possesses angular momentum, which according to
Bohr must be quantised. If jis the quantum number of this angular
momentum, the energy of the rotating dumb-bell is given on Bohr's
theory (p. 100) by
87?1" (2 = 0,1,2,...)
or, according to quantum mechanics (p. 129)
E, = 8784(1 + 1).
We have called the latter energy term the Deslandres term (as con-
trasted with the Balmer term). Here A is the moment of inertia of the
dumb-bell about an axis through the centroid at right angles to the
line joining the nuclei, and is easily found in terms of the nuclear
distance and the masses of the two atoms. Thus, if ri, ta are the dis-
tances from the centroid of the atoms of masses my, Mr, the moment
of inertia is by definition A = my + m2; also mi1 = more and
r1 + 72 =r, where r is the nuclear distance, which we wish to find.
If then we denote by m the effective mass, i.e. if we take
1
_=
= +=, or m=
m
Myt Mr.


===== PDF PAGE 0267 =====

VIIII BAND SPECTRA AND THE RAMAN EFFECT
239
we have for the moment of inertia
A = mr.
The nuclear distance can therefore be found if we know the values
of the Deslandres terms, which can be determined from the emitted
rotational band spectra.
We have already pointed out (p. 101) that
the spectrum emitted by a rotator consists of a series of equidistant
lines. In fact, as we have already repeatedly stated, in simply periodic
motions there is a selection rule Aj = + 1, so that the emitted fre-
quency is found as the difference of two consecutive energy terms:
E, - Es-1 =
BoR 1(043+11-15-115)
h
=
4тA3.
By measuring the separation of the lines,
1 1' we therefore get A,
and accordingly r also. It is assumed, however, in this method of
deduction that the initial and final states of the electronic system are
identical, since a difference in these would involve a change in the
nuclear distance also; moreover, we have disregarded any possible
oscillations of the nuclei relative to one another. The purely rotational
bands are not very suitable in practice, however, for the determination
of nuclear distances, since they lie in the extreme infra-red. We can
easily make a rough estimate of their position. Thus, atomic masses
are of the order of magnitude 10-22 to 10-23 gm., the nuclear distances
are about 10-8 cm., giving moments of inertia of approximately 10-37 to
10-3' gm. cm.?. We thus find for the frequencies values from 10' to 1011
sec.-I, and therefore fractions of a centimetre for the wave-lengths.
TABLE X
NUCLEAR DISTANCES AND MOMENTS OF
INERTIA OF TIM HYDROGEN HALIDES
r. 10" cm.
1.1010 pm. em."
----
0•93
1.35
HC1
1.28
2-66
11 Br
1.12
3•31
HI
1.62
4.31
Above we give a table of a few nuclear distances and moments of
inertia found by means of the infra-red bands.


===== PDF PAGE 0268 =====

240
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
In polyatomic molecules, we have different moments of inertia.
about different axes, and must determine them separately.
The circumstances become distinctly more favourable, if we also
take into account the nuclear vibrations. We spoke at the outset of
equilibrium of the forces between the nuclei and the mean distribution
of the charges of the electrons. Round the position of equilibrium,
which of course must be stable, the nuclei can oscillate, and the whole
electron cloud pulsates along with it. The whole molecular energy,
after deduction of the kinetic energy of the nuclei, is to be regarded
as potential energy, V("), of the nuclear motion; this therefore includes,
besides the pure Coulomb energy of the (positively charged) nuclei, the
mean electronic energy, or, more exactly, the averaged energy of the
electronic motion, calculated on the supposition that the nuclei are
kept fixed. Rotations of the molecule as a whole are in the first instance
disregarded. The equilibrium position of the nuclei is defined by the
minimum of V(r); hence the equilibrium
V(T)
nuclear distance ro is given by (dV/dr)r. = 0.
Such a minimum necessarily exists, as other-
wise no molecule having a finite nuclear
distance could be formed at all. Fig. 5
Fig. 5. Graph of potential as a function of the distance
between the two atoms combined in a molecule. The position
of equilibrium is at ro.
shows diagrammatically a potential curve of the type in ques-
tion. From the minimum at to the potential rises very steeply as r
becomes smaller, the Coulomb repulsion between the two nuclei pre-
ponderating here; in the direction of greater nuclear distances the
potential curve fattens and asymptotically approaches a definite
limiting level, which in the diagram has been arbitrarily taken as the
zero level; this corresponds to the case of nuclei which are far apart,
so that the molecule is practically completely split up into its con-
stituent parts. In this position the potential energy V(r) of the
nuclear motion is simply equal to the constant electronic energy
of the two separated atoms, and can therefore be normalized to
zero; the nuclei (and with them the whole atoms) then move as free
particles.
In the potential hollow of V(r) the nuclei can vibrate as quantum
oscillators.
In the neighbourhood of the equilibrium position ro, the
potential curve is approximately parabolic in form; this we see from
the Taylor expansion of V(r) at the point r = 1o:


===== PDF PAGE 0269 =====

VIII] BAND SPECTRA AND THE RAMAN EFFECT
241
+....
For not too great amplitudes, therefore, the nuclei vibrate like har-
monic oscillators, since of course in this case the restoring force is
proportional to the distance; we can therefore apply the formula for
the harmonic oscillator, which from the classical standpoint
lead to the energy levels
Els = hugs
(s = 0, 1, 2, . .•),
•
and from the standpoint of wave mechanics to the formula
Es = hro(s + 4);
the first formula was deduced in § 2 (p. 101), the second is obtained
by solving the wave equation of the harmonic oscillator (p. 124, or
Appendix XVI, p. 295). The proper frequency yo is determined by
the restoring force, being given, as we may easily prove, by the equation
"o =
2т
By the rules of differential geometry (d'V/dr)r is equal to the curva-
ture of the potential curve at the point r = ro, so that the result can
also be expressed in the following form: the greater the curvature of
the potential curve of the nuclear motion at the position of equilibrium,
the greater is the proper frequency, and the higher are the corre-
sponding energy levels.
The foregoing formula, as has already been mentioned, only hold
for small amplitudes of vibration, or, what comes to the same thing,
for the low quantum numbers. In the case of the more highly excited
states, the deviation of the potential curve from the parabolic form
has the eflect of making it no longer allowable to treat the vibration
as that of a harmonic oscillator; the formula deduced above have to
be supplemented by corrections, which alter the values of the terms;
when the quantum number s increases, the terms in fact crowd more
and more closely together as they approach the so-called convergence
limit (fig. 6). This limit corresponds to the dissociation of the mole-
cule; it requires a quantity of energy equal to the depth of the potential
hollow below the asymptotic limiting value of V(r), that is, the quantity
V(co) - V(r); on excitation by this or a greater quantity of energy
the molecule splits up into atoms or ions, which then move apart with


===== PDF PAGE 0270 =====

242
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
a definite velocity, given by the excess energy. In the spectrum,
this finds its expression in the fact that a band occurs with a conver-
gence limit, which is immediately followed by a continuum (Franck).
From the position of the limit we can determine the dissociation energy,
and that much more exactly than by the thermal measurements used
in chemistry. Thanks to this principle, the work of separation is now
well known for a great number of molecules, for example,
H2: 101, N2: 210, 02: 117•3 kcal/mole.
To give some idea of the order of magnitude of the
frequencies of vibration, we quote here a few funda-.
ovards it, heheorespond to the diss. To if the moice le via mediat!
the chile Contine in tole y, and in apat after dissociation the component
mental vibrational frequencies Voso. (after Ozerny), in the form of
wave numbers:
HF : 4003 ст. -1,
HCI : 2907 cm.-1,
HBr : 2575 cm.-1.
For comparison, we give also the corresponding fundamental rota-
tional frequences Vrot.:
HF : 41•1 cm.-1,
HCI : 20•8 cm.-1,
HBr : 16•7 cm.-.
It will be observed that the vibrational quanta are very decidedly
larger than the rotational quanta.
Up till now, in dealing with vibrations we have disregarded the
possible occurrence of molecular rotations. When absorption takes
place, rotation and vibration can of course be excited simultaneously;
the energy is then given approximately by
Boss= Bo + E, = hro(8 + 3) + 8734, (i + 1);
the energy quanta of the rotational motion are for a first approxi-
mation simply added to the vibrational energy terms. The frequen-
cies, which arise from differences of such terms (the selection rules
4 = 0, 1; 4= 1, 2, hold here), that is, for instance,
for the fundamental vibration


===== PDF PAGE 0271 =====

VIII] BAND SPECTRA AND THE RAMAN EFFECT
243
18 100+1 - 14 1),
872|
are the frequencies which give the rotational-vibrational bands; in
consequence of the large value of the proper frequency vo they lie in
the short wave infra-red. The addition of the vibrational quantum
hy, therefore causes the whole spectrum to be displaced in the direc-
tion towards shorter waves, i.e. into the region which can be reached
fairly easily by experimental methods; still, the law of succession of
the rotational lines is more complicated here than in the case of pure
rotations, since the moment of inertia, which is determinative for the
separation of the lines, depends on the value of the nuclear distance
for the time being, and may be different in the initial and final states.
The energy terms Eg, written down above do not give the com-
plete scheme of terms, since we laid down the condition that the
electronic state of the molecule does not change in the rotational and
vibrational transitions. But the electronic state can be altered by
absorption or emission of light; for the molecule, exactly as for the
atom, there are excited states, which are distinguished by quantum
numbers n = 1, 2,. ...
To every such state there corresponds a
particular potential energy of the nuclear motion, Vn(r), which is found
by averaging; we therefore obtain different curves for the potential
of the nuclei, corresponding to the separate excitation levels of the
electronic motion. The horizontal asymptotes (v → co) of these curves
give the differences of energy in the end
Volts
products occurring in dissociation. If, for
3
example, molecular hydrogen H, dissociates,
2
it splits up, according to the electronic state
1
of the molecule, either into two hydrogen
atoms in the ground state, or into an un-
2E0
excited and an excited hydrogen atom, or
-1
into two excited atoms; to the various
-2
energies of the products of dissociation
-3
Fig. 7.-Potential curves for homopolar
binding (Ig is
example).
One curve has a potential minimum (attraction);
the other corresponds to a pure repulsion.
-40
2
3
4
R
5'00
there correspond the various horizontal asymptotes of the potential
curves for the nuclear vibrations.
In fig. 7 two potential curves are shown, one of which, Ey, possesses
a minimum, and therefore makes a stable chemical binding possible,
while the other, Ez, steadily falls; the latter of course does not corre-


===== PDF PAGE 0272 =====

244
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
spond to any chemical binding, but to a repulsion between the atoms,
since its lowest state represents the state of atoms infinitely far sepa-
rated. This double possibility occurs even in the case of the hydrogen
molecule (see § 6, p. 253).
In the case of simultaneous excitation of higher electronic states,
of vibration and of rotation, the total energy is given approximately
by the formula
E = Ent Es + Ej;
where En represents the pure electronic energy, as determined by the
energy difference between the minima of the various potential curves.
The presence of En has the effect of displacing the bands into the
visible or ultra-violet region, since the order of magnitude of the
frequency determined by transitions from one electronic state of the
molecule into another is the same as that of electronic transitions in
the case of atoms; the combination of an electronic jump with a
transition in the vibrational and rotational state implies the emission
of a rotational-vibrational band in the region of wave-lengths fixed
by the electronic transition. The appearance of these bands is the
same as that of the pure rotational-vibrational bands, except for the
fact that small "perturbations" occur, which are due to the inter-
action between the electronic and the nuclear motion (for example,
alteration of the proper frequency of the nuclear vibration by an
electronic jump) (fig. 8, Plate VIII, p. 168).
The electronic terms En for diatomic molecules admit of similar
classification to those of atoms. Here, however, we cannot use the
orbital angular momentum for this purpose, as in the case of atoms
(1 = 0, 1, 2,...; S, P, D... terms), since the electron cloud has
no longer a fixed total angular momentum, as it has in atoms; for the
line joining the nuclei represents a specially distinguished direction
in the molecule, and it rotates in space (rotational terms), carrying of
course the electron cloud along with it. The component of the electronic
angular momentum in this special direction is quantised, however, not
being affected by the rotation of the molecule as a whole. The quantum
number of this angular momentum component is denoted by 1, and,
in analogy with the atomic case, the terms are designated by Greek
capital letters, corresponding to the value of the quantum number:
1=0
1 2
...
П Д
. .
terms.
We may also mention that special features appear in the scheme as


===== PDF PAGE 0273 =====

VIII] BAND SPECTRA AND THE RAMAN EFFECT
245
developed so far, if a molecule consists of two equal nuclei; degeneracies
then occur, which express themselves in definite typical alterations in
the spectrum (dropping out of certain lines).
Finally, we must refer to a complication which arises from the
fact that the nuclei are really not point charges, but have a structure.
The most important effect of this is the nuclear spin.
The inner
angular momenta of the nuclei have to be added vectorially to the
angular momentum of the rest of the system, due to the rotational
motion of the nuclei and electrons, with their spin. In the case of
two equal nuclei, very large degeneracy effects arise from this cause.
The simplest case is that of the molecule Hz. Here we have as nuclei
two protons, each with the spin ½ Vectorial composition gives
or 2 + 2-1; in the latter case the resultant nuclear
moment I can have three settings with respect to the moment of
the rest of the motions, determined by the possible components
-1, 0, +1 of the vector of length 1. These states have all the same
probability. Hence, molecules with nuclear moment 1 will be three
times more frequent than those with the nuclear moment 0. Further,
it is found that practically no transitions take place spontaneously
from the one sort of molecule to the other (Heisenberg, Hund); they
exist almost independently of each other, and so they have been
given names. Molecules with the moment 0 are called parahydrogen;
those with the moment 1, orthohydrogen. Ordinary hydrogen is a
mixture of these in the ratio 1: 3, as is shown by many properties,
especially the specific heat (Dennison, 1927); but orthohydrogen, which
has the higher energy content, can be converted into parahydrogen by
means of catalytic effects, such as adsorption at surfaces (Bonhoeffer
and Harteck, Eucken and Hiller, 1929). The difference in respect of
energy arises from the fact that the paramolecules with the spin 0 can
only have even rotational quantum numbers, and orthomolecules with
the spin I only odd ones; the lowest state with quantum number 0
belongs therefore to parahydrogen. Since the latter occurs in ordinary
hydrogen in the ratio 1:3 as compared with the ortho-modification, the
intensities of the band lines are in the same ratio. Such a variation
in the intensity of band lines occurs in all molecules which consist of
two equal atoms with nuclear spin, and makes it possible to determine
this spin. The method has already been mentioned (p. 178).
Band research has already developed into a science of considerable
dimensions. The investigation and analysis of band spectra gives very
far-reaching information regarding the structure of molecules. For
the interpretation of the extensive experimental material which has


===== PDF PAGE 0274 =====

246
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
been collected, ingenious mathematical methods, such as group
theory, considerations of symmetry, and so on, have been called
into service.
To conclude this section, there is one other phenomenon we should
like to discuss, viz. the Raman effect. Let it be mentioned before-
hand, however, that this is not a revolutionary discovery, like, for ex-
ample, the discovery of the wave nature of the electron, but an effect
which was predicted by the quantum theory (Smekal (1923), Kramers-
Heisenberg) some years before it was found experimentally, though
it can also be explained within the framework of classical physics
(Cabannes (1928), Rocard, Placzek); its great importance rests rather
on the facility with which it can be applied to the study of molecules,
and on the colossal amount of material relating to it which has been
accumulated so quickly. The effect was discovered simultaneously
(1928) by Raman in India, and by Landsberg and Mandelstam in
Russia. They found that scattered light contains, in addition to the
frequency of the incident light, a series of other frequencies.
The classical explanation of this effect is as follows. If a light wave
E= E, cosmut falls on a molecule, it produces in this molecule a
dipole moment
p=aE, cos 2mut,
where a denotes the polarizability tensor. As we have already re-
marked, the direction of the induced polarization is not in general the
same as that of the exciting field strength. In the present case what
we have to consider is the effect produced on the induced polarization
by the state of the molecule as regards rotation and vibration. For,
when the molecule rotates, the ellipsoid of polarization turns along
with it, and the induced dipole moment therefore vibrates in the same
rhythm. Similarly, when the nuclei oscillate, the whole electronic
system also does so, and this again causes an oscillation of the polariza-
bility in the same rhythm; in fact, since the electronic motion round
the nuclei is much more rapid than the oscillations of the nuclei them-
selves, we can use the averaged electronic distribution when we are
considering the effect of the nuclear vibrations on the polarizability.
From the Fourier series which represents the influence of the rotations
and vibrations on the polarizability we pick out a single term vs, and
write a in the form
a =ao+ ay cos 274st + 8);
here & denotes an undetermined phase which varies from molecule to


===== PDF PAGE 0275 =====

VIIII BAND SPECTRA AND THE RAMAI
molecule. If we substitute this expression in the form
moment, we find
p=a E, cos 2mut + a E, cos mut cos (2mu+8)
= aE, cos 2nut
The vibration of the dipole moment may therefore be regarded as due
to the superposition of three vibrations with the frequencies v, v + vs
and v-s. Since the dipole moment is the cause of the scattered
light, the latter contains the frequencies v + vs and v - vs in addition
to the frequency v of the incident light; moreover, since the phase &
is arbitrary, the three vibrations are incoherent. Precisely the same
holds good for all the rotational and vibrational frequencies of the
molecule.
The spectrum of the scattered light is therefore a sort of band in
the neighbourhood of the incident line, from which the rotational and
vibrational frequencies can be read off, exactly as in the case of
emission and absorption bands. The advantage of the method, how-
ever, is that the whole band is situated at a part of the visible spectrum
which can be chosen at will, its position depending only on the choice
of the irradiating frequency. Thus, for example, we can determine the
constants of the ground state of the electronic system by observations,
in the visible spectral region, of the separations of the lines of the
bands, while the corresponding emission bands lie far in the infra-
red. It should be noted that the displacement of the bands into the
visible, by observation of the rotational-vibrational bands in the case
when a simultaneous electronic jump is involved, does not give the
molecular constants of the unexcited " natural" state, but those of
some excited state, which in general does not interest the chemist.
With regard, however, to the intensity relations in the Raman
lines, special features are found, which do not admit of explanation
on classical lines; for example, the component of the scattered
light with the frequency y—s is much stronger than the one
with the frequency v + Vs. This phenomenon can be understood at
once in the light of the following simple quantum consideration. If
an incident light quantum hits the molecule, it may as a first possi-
bility be scattered without loss of energy. It may, on the other hand,
excite the molecule, and so give up to it the vibrational energy hus;
in the scattered light the light quantum then appears with the energy
hy-Vs). In rare cases, again, it may happen that a light quantum


===== PDF PAGE 0276 =====

248
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
hits a molecule which is already excited; it may then take energy
away from the molecule, the latter falling into the lower state, while
the light quantum flies on with energy h(v + vs). Hence on the long
wave side the Raman lines are strong, but only a few weak lines lie
on the short wave side.
The Raman effect has come to be of the greatest importance for
molecular research, since it is comparatively simple to observe, and
makes it possible to reach exact results regarding molecular structure
in many cases, from the mere consideration that certain lines occur or
do not occur. The following example serves to illustrate these remarks.
The molecule NO, assuming rectilinear arrangement, might have
either of the forms NON or NNO. The question is how we can dis-
tinguish between these alternatives. Now the first form is obviously
symmetrical, the second not. But, among the vibrations taking part
in the Raman effect, those belonging to a symmetrical molecular
structure difer characteristically (in the number and polarization of
the lines) from those belonging to one which is unsymmetrical. Thus
we can deduce without ambiguity from experiment that the non-
symmetric form NNO is the correct one. Similar considerations can
also be adduced with respect to complicated molecules (for instance,
the symmetric structures methane, CH,, and carbon tetrachloride,
CCI), but we cannot go into this here.
4. Chemical Binding. Classification of Types of Binding.
Hitherto we have considered the electronic system of the molecule
as a whole, and confined our attention in the main to properties and
effects in relation to which the molecule is regarded as a given struc-
ture. We must now proceed to deal with the question which to the
chemist is the specially interesting one, viz. how a molecular binding
can come about at all, or how our molecular model is produced from
the individual separate atoms.
We distinguish several different kinds of chemical binding, but
between the principal sorts all possible intermediate stages occur. In
our classification we adhere to the distinction drawn by Franck, accord-
ing to which the decisive criterion is whether a molecule in dissociating
tends more readily to split up into ions or into neutral atoms. It is
true that the type of dissociation sometimes depends also on the
excitation level of the molecule; still Franck's criterion gives in all
cases a suitable point of view for the classification of binding. We
therefore distinguish the following cases:
I. The molecule splits up into ions in dissociation by electrolysis


===== PDF PAGE 0277 =====

VIII]
CHEMICAL BINDING
249
or in consequence of absorption of radiation; this kind of binding is
called ionic binding.* The extreme case of this type of binding is that
in which the atoms are charged even in the molecule, so that they are
present as ions; the binding is then explained by their Coulomb
attraction. In this case we speak of polar (or heteropolar) binding.
The typical case of this kind of binding is that of NaCl. About
a hundred years ago it was conjectured by Berzelius that all
chemical forces are really of electrostatic nature. The hypothesis
was dropped, however, on account of the dificulty of explaining
in this way the binding of atoms of the same kind (eg.
H2, N2...), which cannot possibly be of polar nature. It was
only after it had become possible, by observation of electrolytic
behaviour, of dipole moments and the like, to demarcate polar mole-
cules in some measure from others, that the hypothesis of Berzelius
was revived; it holds good for a limited class of bindings only, but
within this range, as has been shown by Lewis and Kossel (1916), is
capable of yielding important results.
II. The molecule breaks up into atoms, as, for instance, in the case
of thermal excitation, or in consequence of absorption of radiation;
we speak in this case of atomic binding. Here there are several sub-cases
to be distinguished:
1. Atomic bindings with saturation of valency: valency bindings
(also called homopolar bindings); to these belong in the first place the
diatomic gases, such as Hz, Na, Oz, as well as most organic compounds,
for instance, CHa
2. Loose bindings without saturation of valency, due to the van
der Waals forces: cohesion bindings.
3. Bindings which are effective, for example, in the case of the
lattice formation of metals, and which we comprise under the name
metallic bindings.
1. A series of bindings which do not admit of inclusion in the
above scheme, such as the benzene binding, the diamond binding, and
other similar binding types.
Between these various groups there is of course a series of inter-
mediate stages, which will not, however, be considered here, the next
sections being confined to a discussion of the most important of the
types of binding mentioned above.
* The nomenclature is not quite fixed, but that given here seems to be gradually
becoming established.
As a matter of history, it may be noted that the distinction
between heteropolar and homopolar binding was first drawn by Aberr: the separation
into ionic and atomic binding, with the criterion of the dissociation products, was
introduced by Franck.


===== PDF PAGE 0278 =====

250
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
5. Theory of Heteropolar Ionic Binding.
How this binding comes about, we have already indicated above;
we shall now consider the question a little more fully (Kossel, Born and
Landé, 1918). The atoms which come next the inert gases are always
striving to become converted into the inert gas configuration, by taking
up or giving up electrons. In the alkali atoms the valency electron
moves outside a closed shell and is comparatively loosely bound-the
alkalies have a very small ionization energy I (see the numerical values of
the ionization potential in Table IV, pp. 163, 164, 165). Conversely, in
the halogens there is one electron too few to make up a closed shell,
which, as we know, represents a very stable electronic configuration;
they are therefore very ready to pick up an electron in order to complete
the shell. We call this the electronic affinity E; it is given by the energy
which is set free when the electron settles in its place. Strictly con-
nected with these concepts is that of electrovalency; positive electro-
valency being the number of electrons loosely bound and therefore
outside a closed shell in the atom, and negative clectrovalency the
number of electrons required to complete the inert gas configuration.
The genesis of an ionic binding may be pictured as a process con-
sisting of two steps. In the first, the two reacting atoms become
charged in opposite senses; thus, for example, Na + Cl = Nat + Cl.
The second step is the attraction between the two ions in accordance
with Coulomb's law; the energy of the attraction is —e. By itself,
this would lead to the absolute coalition of the two ions; however,
at small distances repulsive forces come into play, which can be
accounted for by quantum mechanics. To represent them, a law of
the form b/n has been tried, with good success; quantum mechanics
gives approximately an exponential law be-ile, which has been found
to answer even a little better. The position of equilibrium is then
given by the value of for which the sum of this part of the energy
and the Coulomb energy has a minimum value.
In the gas molecule, in consequence of the one-sided action of the
electric forces, the electron clouds of the two ions are of course very
much deformed, so that the analysis of the ionic binding becomes
extremely difficult. The circumstances are simpler in crystals,
especially in the highly symmetrical ones of the rock salt (cubic
face-centred, fig. 9) and similar types. In these the deformation dis-
appears on account of the symmetry; in a rock salt lattice the same
force is exerted on four sides on a chlorine ion by the neighbouring
sodium ions, and a similar result holds for the more distant ions. Thus


===== PDF PAGE 0279 =====

VIII] THEORY OF HETEROPOLAR IONIC BINDING
25I
we can calculate the lattice energy, that is, the energy U which must
be supplied in order to break up the lattice completely. It is given by
a sum of the form
the summation being taken over all the lattice points; here we adopt
the same hypothesis as before with
regard to the repulsive forces. The
evaluation of this sum presents con-
siderable difficulties, since the first
or Coulomb part is only slowly con-
vergent; the acting forces certainly
diminish as the distance increases,
but on the other hand the number of
ions, at the same distance from
given ion on which they act, increases
as the square of the distance.
Advan-
Fig. 9.-Face-centred cubic lattice
tageous methods of evaluating such
lattice sums have been given by Madelung and Ewald (1918); the
expression found for U has the form
U =-
Sn
where & is the lattice constant, ic. the distance of a sodium ion from
the nearest chlorine ion; a, which is called Madelung's constant,
depends on the lattice type, and for NaCl has the value 1-75. To de-
termine the other constants, B and n, which are unknown initially,
two equations are available. There is first the equation of equilibrium
dU/do = 0, expressing that the lattice energy is a minimum; secondly,
d-U|d is the force needed to compress the crystal by a certain
amount, and so can be determined experimentally. For the alkaline
halides values of n between 6 and 10 are obtained in this way. Better
results are found by using the exponential law be r for the repulsive
force, as given by wave mechanics; the constant p is found to have
approximately the same value for all the alkaline halides, viz.
p ~ 0•35 A. (Born and Mayer, 1932).
The results predicted by the theory can be tested directly. Thus,
an experimental determination of lattice energies by J. Mayer, by
means of thermal dissociation, showed good agreement for several
salts. It is also possible to test the theory indirectly by calculating


===== PDF PAGE 0280 =====

252
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP.
the electronic affinity of a halogen derived from different salts (say of
(1 from the compounds Lill, NaCl, &c.), with the help of the following
cyclic process (Born, 1919; Haber):
NaCl solid
Nat gas, CI gas
Na solid, Cl, gas
Na gas, Cl gas
We start with solid rock salt (crystalline). By adding the lattice
energy U (energy supplied is to be estimated as positive), we break up
the crystal into ions. By further addition of the energy E correspond-
ing to the electronic affinity of Cl, we can remove the excess electron
from the Cl-, whereupon the Nat ion picks this electron up, at the
same time giving up the ionization energy I, and so forming neutral
Na gas. This gives up the heat of sublimation S of metallic Na, and is
converted into solid sodium, while the atomic Cl gas gives up the
dissociation energy D of the halogen and is converted into molecular
Cl, gas. By the action of this gas on the Na metal, crystalline rock
salt is formed, the heat of formation @ being given up; and thus the
cycle is closed. The energy of course must balance, so that we must.
have
U-I+E-S-D -Q=0.
Here all the quantities are known except the electronic affinity E,
viz. I, D, S, Q from thermal and electrical measurements, and U
from the lattice theory; and we can therefore calculate E from the
TABLE XI. - Eloridi (in ica Fet Clrom the alkaline
TABLE 8l0e lot on primes of the
LiCI
NaCl
KCl
RbCl
CsCl | Mean
F
CI
Br
85-7
86•5
87-1
85-7
87.3
86•5
95•3
86•5
81-5
74-2
equation. In the result, the same value must be found from all salts
of the same halogen, and this, to a good approximation, is found to
be the case. From the chlorine salts, for example, the values shown
in the accompanying Table XI were found for the electronic affinity
of Cl. The average values found for the different halogens are given
in Table XII.


===== PDF PAGE 0281 =====

VIII] THEORY OF HETEROPOLAR IONIC BINDING
253
Recently, Mayer has succeeded in confirming these results by direct
measurement, by means of molecular rays. It may be mentioned
further, that for ions in solutions of salts there exists an absorption
spectrum, which is referable to this process of liberation of the
electron from the halogen ion; by taking into consideration the action
of the surrounding medium (water), the electronic affinity is verified
to a rough approximation (Franck and Scheibe).
6. Theory of Valency Binding.
We proceed now to consider the so-called valency binding. Here
(according to Lewis, 1923) experience shows that such binding is
frequently associated with the existence of an electron pair, which is such
that each of the pair is shared by, or belongs to both of, the two
atoms which are combined with each other. The hydrogen molecule
is to be regarded as the simplest case of this kind, being built up from
two equal nuclei and two electrons.
A method of dealing with the problem of the hydrogen molecule
by quantum mechanics was pointed out by London and Heitler (1927).
The following practical electrical example is exactly analogous to the
case we are to consider, and may help to make the treatment of the
general case easier to follow. If two like electrical oscillating circuits
are brought close to each other, the original frequency of each being
Yo, the coupling throws them to some extent out of tune, yo being
split up into two different frequencies, one higher than yo and the
other lower, so that beats are produced by the combination. The
conditions in the hydrogen molecule are analogous to those mentioned;
the two oscillating circuits are represented by the electrons revolving
round the nuclei (in separate atoms). The coupling puts them out of
tune a little, and we thus get a frequency somewhat higher than vo
and one somewhat lower. But, as we know, to every frequency yo
there corresponds an energy hro; hence the undisturbed energy 2Eo
of the two separate hydrogen atoms gives rise to a somewhat lower
and a somewhat higher energy of the coupled system
E1 = 2E, - W(R), Ez = 2Eo + Wa(R),
where Wir) and Walk) denote practically the coupling energies,
which depend on the distance R between the two atoms, i.e. the nuclear
distance (see Appendix XXXI, p. 340). The state represented by Eg
possesses less energy than the dissociated state (separate hydrogen
atoms), and therefore corresponds to a binding; E, denotes repulsion
of the two atoms (see fig. 7, p. 243). The energy W,(R) corresponds


===== PDF PAGE 0282 =====

254
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
to the frequency with which the deformation of the wave functions
by the interaction oscillates from one atom to the other. Since the
square of the amplitude of a wave function represents the probability
of finding a particle at a given place, this can be interpreted as an
" exchange"
of the two electrons. Therefore W,(R) is called " exchange
energy"
The phenomenon of valency saturation is explained by Pauli's ex-
clusion principle. Just as in the case of atoms, so also in that of mole-
cules the atoms, in consequence of this principle, become arranged
in shells round the two nuclei. In the hydrogen molecule, the two
electrons are in the ground state in the innermost " shell"; they must
therefore, like the two electrons of a K shell, have opposite spins. Thus,
in the attraction-state Ey the spins of the two electrons are antiparallel;
on the contrary, it may be shown that in the state E, the spins would
be parallel. Here again "closed shells" represent specially stable
states, and a chemical binding will easily come about it, in the mole-
cule, saturation of the spins of the outer electrons occurs, that is to
say, if a closed shell is formed. Generally, only those electrons in an
atom, which do not already form an antiparallel pair with another
electron, co-operate to a first approximation (the atomie distance R
being great) in the binding. The number of spins not compensated is
equal to the number of free valencies of the molecule (atom). The
true (homopolar) valency is therefore equal to the number of electrons
with spins not saturated, As examples we take the first two rows of the
periodic table. In the first row we have Hand He. Univalent hydrogen
we have already discussed. Helium possesses two spins already satu-
rated in a closed shell, and is therefore chemically neutral. The first
element in the second row, Li, is, like hydrogen, univalent; it has one
radiating electron outside a closed shell. With Be another electron
comes in, whose spin becomes saturated in presence of the first I
electron;
Be should accordingly, like He, have valency 0. Actually
it has valency 2, the explanation possibly being that it is only after
excitation that the directions of spin in the two electrons come to
have the same sense. Then follow the three elements B, C, N with
1, 2, 3 electrons respectively in the outermost shell (2p electrons).
If a fourth p electron enters, so forming O, it will necessarily become
saturated by means of one of those already present; for, when a
definite spin direction is prescribed, there are only three possibilities
for the setting of the orbital angular momentum. The last comer of
the electrons must therefore, by the exclusion principle, take its place
with the opposite spin direction, and so compensates one of the three


===== PDF PAGE 0283 =====

VIII]
THEORY OF VALENCY BINDING
255
free spins of the nitrogen configuration of the electrons; oxygen is
therefore divalent. When we pass on to fluorine, a new electron is
added, which again saturates one of the two spins still present, making
fluorine univalent. Neon with its closed shell is of course chemically
neutral—its chemical valency is 0. This general view is well confirmed
on the experimental side. We have already spoken of the difficulty
with regard to Be; it must also be remembered that the beryllium
compounds are mostly heteropolar. A more serious objection to the
theory is that it ascribes two valencies to carbon, whereas this element
is well known to be quadrivalent. This difficulty has also received
a simple explanation. The carbon
atom possesses, close
above
the ground state, an excitation level, in which it is quadrivalent;
the ordinary chemical carbon bonds are due therefore to the first
excited state of the carbon atom.
For the sake of brevity we shall not enter here into the mathematical
treatment of valency binding (see Appendix XXXI, p. 340); we may
mention, however, as special successes of the theory that it makes it pos-
sible to deal quantitatively with nuclear distances, heats of dissociation,
and nuclear vibrational frequencies for molecular hydrogen. In other
diatomic molecules also, the theory has proved capable of giving
qualitative and quantitative results, which are in good agreement
with experiment.
The interpretation of polyatomic compounds has been found difti-
cult. Here the semi-empirical theories of Herzberg, Mund, Slater,
Pauling and others pave the way to a satisfactory
theory. A typical example of the phenomena to be
explained is the fact, which has long been well known
to physicists, that the three atoms of the water molecule
do not lie in a straight line, as one might at first expect,
Fig. ro. Model of
water molecuk
but form an isosceles triangle (fig. 10). This phenome-
non appears to have been successfully explained, at least qualitatively.
7. Theory of van der Waals Forces and other Kinds of Binding.
Of this subject we shall give only a very brief summary. The van
der Waals cohesion forces depend on the mutual deformation of the
atoms, and that in two different ways. First, the action of the field
which emanates from the permanent dipole or quadrupole of the
molecule, on the dipole induced in the other molecule by that lield,
leads on the average to an attraction; & result which, even before the
quantum theory, had been proved by Debye and Keesom (1921) by
classical considerations. From this, however, it would follow that


===== PDF PAGE 0284 =====

256_
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[Снар.
spherically symmetrical atoms (as of the inert gases) or molecules
should show no cohesion, which is contrary to the experimental fact
that all gases can be condensed. A way out of this difficulty was shown
by London (1930), who proved that the deformability has a second
effect, which is characteristic of the quantum theory. According
to this theory there exists in fact a "zero-point motion", i.e. even
in the lowest energy state an atom or molecule has to be put in corre-
spondence with a system of moving charges (electrons), so that it
carries a dipole oscillating with electronic frequency. If then two
such systems come near each other, the zero-point motions of the
dipoles always act in such a way that on the average the result is
attraction; and the calculation gives an interaction energy which is
inversely proportional to the sixth power of the nuclear distance, or
W ~1/R6. In many atoms or molecules without free valencies (spins),
even before condensation a sort of pairing occurs, which is attributed
to the van der Waals forces of attraction; it has to do with compara-
tively loose molecules with small dissociation energy. Examples of
this sort of binding are given by metallic molecules, such as Hg, und
others. At sufficiently low temperatures, in all gases liquefaction
occurs, and finally solidification. By means of his theory of cohesion,
London (Appendix XXXII, p. 343) was able, to a fair approximation,
to calculate the heats of sublimation of molecular lattices from atomic
properties (ionization energy, proper frequency).
The existence of metals cannot be explained by the types of binding
dealt with so far; we must regard them as being so formed that the
positive atomic residues are held together by the free metallic electrons.
A few cases, lithium, for example, have been successfully worked out
(Slater, Wigner). Special difficulties are presented by a type of lattice
(diamond lattice) in which the binding apparently depends on the
saturation of the (four) valencies; among crystals of this type there
occur both metals (Ge, Sn) and non-conductors, the latter including
the extremely hard diamond itself (besides SiC, AgI, &c.). The re-
lations involved have been elucidated by Hund, from the point of
view of quantum mechanics.
Other examples, which in each case require the application of
special theoretical considerations, are the ring formations of organic
chemistry, the benzene ring, for example (Hückel); according to
chemists' ideas the 6 carbon atoms are arranged in the form of a
hexagon, with the hydrogen atoms outside (fig. 11). In order to secure
that the carbon appear as quadrivalent in the structural diagram,
the chemist has to introduce double bonds as shown. This unsatis-


===== PDF PAGE 0285 =====

VIII]
THEORY OF VAN DER WAALS FORCES
257
factory lack of symmetry in the binding form is avoided by quantum
mechanics, according to which the binding is effected by means of
•electrons, which revolve in the hexagon of
•carbon atoms.
8. Conclusion.
Ha
We have now reached the final stage
of our task. In the preceding chapters
we have in the main confined our account
to the positive results of research, and have
Ho
not dealt in detail with problems which
Fig. II.—Benzene ring. Chemists assume double bonds, in
order to allow for the quadrivalence of carbon.
are not yet completely cleared up. The impression might thus be
given that physics had attained to a certain degree of finality. That,
however, is by no means the case. There still remain many perplexing
questions, all strictly connected with one another, and all in the last
resort hanging upon the question of the structure of the nucleus. The
•questions are: which are the real elementary particles, electrons,
positrons, protons or neutrons? Are photons, possibly also neutrinos,
to be added to the list, or is the part they play a different one, perhaps
by reason of the fact that their rest mass is nil? Why are the other
particles of two kinds, one kind with small mass, the other with large?
What are the forces which retain these particles in the nuclei? What
are the laws of the stability and instability of nuclei?
Many physicists expect the answers to these questions to come
from a blend of the theory of relativity and the quantum theory.
The methods in use at present relate practically to the one body prob-
lem only, and fail when applied to processes involving several particles
in rapid relative motion. The essential point here is the dualistic idea,
according to which particles with their de Broglie waves, and electro-
magnetic fields, are regarded as two entirely different things. On the
contrary, the author is firmly convinced that a satisfactory theory
must be unitary in character, i.e. it must assume only one carrier of
physical processes, the electromagnetic field, of which the particles
are in some sense singularities. This conviction is based above all on
the fact that particles, electrons and positrons, can be annihilated,
becoming converted into electromagnetic waves; and that conversely
they can be born in pairs from such waves. Dirac's theory of the
positron (considered
as a "hole" in a multitude of electrons with


===== PDF PAGE 0286 =====

258
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
[CHAP. VILI
negative energy) is a brilliant description of these processes, but not
a satisfying explanation. All nuclear processes are transformations and
separations of particles, which are so closely allied to the elementary
process of amalgamation just referred to, that one is strongly inclined
to refer them to the same root cause.
In the author's opinion, the
suggested generalization of Maxwell's electrodynamies, with the finite-
ness of the energy of point charges preserved, defines the direction
in which research should proceed.
We look to the physics of the future for the solution of the nigma
of inorganic matter.
But the principal results of modern physics
reach far beyond the domain in which they are won. As Nice Bohr
first pointed out, the new views with regard to causality and deter
minism, which have arisen as a result of the quantum theory, ure also
of great significance for the biological sciences and for psychology.
If even in inanimate nature the physicist comes up against absolute
limits, at which strict causal connexion ceases and must ho replaced
by statistics, we shall be prepared, in the realm of living things, und
emphatically so in the processes connected with consciousness and
will, to meet insurmountable barriers, where mochanistic explanation,
the goal of the older natural philosophy, becomes entiroly meaning-
less. But this has the eflect of completely changing the philosophical
import of research. Physicists of to-day have learned that not every
question about the motion of an electron or a light quantum can be
answered, but only those questions which are compatible with Hvison-
berg's principle of uncertainty. There is a hint here for the biologist
and the psychologist, that they should search for natural limits to
causal explanation in their domains also, and mark out those limits
with the same exactness as the quantum theory is capable of doing
by means of Planck's constant 7i.
This is a programme of modesty, but at the same time one of con-
fident hope.
For what lies within the limitis
s is knowable, and will
become known; it is the world of experience, wide, rich enough in
changing hues and patterns to allure us to explore it in all diroctions.
What lies beyond, the dry tracts of metaphysies, we willingly leave to
speculative philosophy.


===== PDF PAGE 0287 =====

APPENDIX
I. Evaluation of Some Integrals Connected with the Kinetic Theory
of Gases (p. 15).
Integrals of the type
where 1 =mB/2 = m/2k, frequently occur in the kinetic theory
of gases. The general form of the integral may at once be obtained
from the particular cases I, and I, by differentiation with respect to
1. Thus, for example,
dIo
dIy
I 3 = -
di'
d-lo
K: 1,=+2%
I,, the second of the two fundamental integrals, can be evaluated by
elementary methods:
1
I, is Gauss's well-known probability integral
The values of the succeeding integrals obtained, as stated above, by
differentiation are as follows:
I =1, 9c-10 do = Via
13=5 0 10 20=
2X2
259


===== PDF PAGE 0288 =====

260
APPENDIX I
12=5,040-10°20 = 80
and so on.
Application to the integrals occurring in the kinetic theory of gases.—
For n, the total number of molecules, we have
17p3
Similarly, the total energy E is equal to
The expressions for A and ß given in the text (p. 1J) are obtained by
combining these two formula.
Integrals of this type also occur in the calculation of mean values.
As according to Maxwell the number of molecules having a velocity
between o and v + do is
the " mean velocity" i is given by
.00
nudo
- =
I3 =
2
I no do
Again, the "mean square velocity" V(v), which is frequently used
in the kinetic theory of gases, is given by
IN RIN
Sonado
V(0) is a little larger than i, their ratio being V (37/8) = 1-085.
With these quantities we may compare the " most probable velocity"
Up, which corresponds to the maximum of the Maxwell distribution
curve. It is given by the equation do = 0, 0r
do (+ 99) =206-011 - 208) =0;


===== PDF PAGE 0289 =====

APPENDIX II
26I
hence
1
In the Maxwell distribution curve given in the text (fig. 5, p. 15),
the three values v,, i, and Vu are shown in their order and approxi-
mately proper positions.
Multiplying the expression for v, above and below by the square
root of Avogadro's number L and remembering that Lk = R and
Lm = u, we have
2RT
==
V
200 =
/8RT
-;
пре
13
3RT
V (02) =
II. Heat Conduction, Viscosity, and Diffusion (p. 19).
In this appendix we shall give a combined account of three
phenomena by means of which the mean free path in a gas can be
determined experimentally. These phenomena are heat conduction,
viscosity, and diffusion. In all these phenomena there is a variation
in some physical property of the molecules of the gas from point to
point, which, however, tends to disappear as a result of the move-
ments of the molecules.
Heat conduction occurs when external conditions of any kind give
rise to a temperature gradient in a gas, i.e. when the molecules of gas
at different points of space have different mean kinetic energies. Hcat
transference takes place owing to molecules from the warmer regions
moving into cooler regions and giving up their surplus energy there,
while slower-moving molecules move into the warmer regions and
diminish the kinetic energy of the faster molecules there.
The circumstances are similar in the case of viscosity. This mani-
fests itself in the form of a resistance acting on the faster-moving
parts of the gas under consideration. According to the kinetic
theory of gases, this resistance is due to molecules from slower-moving
regions moving into faster-moving regions; as they then have a
smaller mean velocity of flow than their surroundings, they will on
the average be accelerated as a result of collision with the surrounding
molecules, while the latter will be retarded, ie. will be subject to a
(E 908)
18


===== PDF PAGE 0290 =====

262
APPENDIX Il
resistance. We shall not go into the experimental methods for deter-
mining viscosity, but merely mention the result (due to Maxwell), which
perhaps at first sight is surprising: the viscosity, like the thermal con-
ductivity, is within wide limits independent of the pressure of the gas.
The third phenomenon which we shall consider here is diffusion.
If in a mixture of two gases the concentration of one gas varies from
point to point, ie. if the ratio of the concentrations of the two gases
difters at different points of the region occupied by the gaseous mixture
(it is assumed that the pressure is everywhere the same, ie. that the
total number of gas molecules is the same), then it is clear that the
molecules of one gas will gradually move from the regions where the
concentration of this gas is greatest into regions where it is less; and
similarly for the molecules of the other gas.
These three phenomena can be discussed mathematically in a very
simple way provided we confine ourselves to a qualitative survey.
In order to treat them together, we assume that the property A varies
from point to point of space, e.g. has a non-vanishing derivative
dA/dz in the direction of the z-axis. Then for heat conduction A is
to be taken as the mean kinetic energy of a single gas molecule, for
viscosity as the mean velocity of translation of the molecule in the
direction of flow, and for diffusion as the number of molecules of a
particular gas in a cubic centimetre of gaseous mixture. Now this
variation of the property A from point to point gives rise to a trans-
ference of the property; a definite number of molecules cross unit
area normal to the z-axis per second in either direction, and this
number is given, at least approximately, by the product no, where n
is the number of molecules per cubic centimetre and & their mean
velocity. But the molecules crossing the surface from one side possess
the property A to a greater or less extent than those crossing the
surface from the other side, so that there is a transference of the pro-
perty across the surface. The quantity M(A) crossing per second can
easily be estimated if we note that any molecule has a mean free path
I between two successive collisions with other molecules, i.e. in the
interval of time between successive collisions it describes on the average
a path whose length is of the order l; for the purposes of this approxi-
mation we are not concerned with the exact numerical factor. For
M(A) we readily obtain the expression
M(A) ~ N0{A(7-1) - A(z0+1)}
where to is the co-ordinate of the element of area considered. Expand-
ing, we have (apart from numerical factors)


===== PDF PAGE 0291 =====

APPENDIX II
263
14(1) ~ - not (de) 20
The amount of the property A transferred is therefore proportional
to the " gradient of A "
, and also to the number of molecules per cubic
centimetre, their mean velocity, and their mean free path. This equa-
tion is known as the transport equation.
We note that M(A) is independent of the pressure, provided that
A itself denotes a property of the gas molecules which is independent
of the pressure (Maxwell). For the pressure of a gas is given by
p=nkT, ie. at constant temperature depends only on the number
of molecules per cubic centimetre. It is true that n appears as a factor
in the transport equation; but this factor is compensated by the
occurrence in the formula of the mean free path, which is inversely
proportional to n and to the cross-section of the molecule. This inde-
pendence of the pressure accordingly results from the fact that though
more molecules take part in the transference of A at the higher
pressures, they do not on the average travel so far.
We shall now make particular application of the transport equation
to the three phenomena mentioned above. We begin with heat con-
duction. Here A stands for the kinetic energy of a molecule, i.e.
Ekin = const. + c,mT, where c,m is the specific heat of the gas at
constant volume, for a single molecule (c, is the specific heat per mole).
The quantity of heat @ which crosses unit area per second is then
given by
aT
Q~-nolc,m...
We see that it is proportional to the temperature gradient; the factor
of proportionality k = nole,m is called the thermal conductivity.
In the case of the viscosity, as we saw above, A stands for mu,
the mean linear momentum of a molecule resulting from the flow of
the gas. Then the momentum transferred per second (per unit area
of the surface of contact between faster-moving portions of gas and
slower-moving), i.e. the resistance R, is given by
R~ -nülm
the quantity y = nolm is called the coefficient of viscosity. We see
that the quotient /nc, is a constant of the order of unity. Theoreti-
cally this constant must be the same for all molecules of the same


===== PDF PAGE 0292 =====

264
APPENDIX II
structure, i.e. the quotient must have a constant value for all mona-
tomic gases, another constant value for all diatomic gases, and so on.
Our qualitative discussion of course does not enable us to obtain the
exact value of the constant.
As we have already emphasized, the discussion given here is of
course only a rough sketch. Improvements and refinements in the
theory have been made by Boltzmann, Maxwell, and others, by con-
sidering the mechanism of collision and the distribution of velocities
in greater detail; these improvements, however, yield no new principle,
but merely lead to greater accuracy in the numerical factors. Here,
however, we shall not go into the matter further. It remains for us
to point out that the above theory is not valid unless the mean free
path is small compared with the dimensions of the vessel containing
the gas. If this is not the case (at atmospheric pressure l is of the
order of 10-6 cm., but is equal to about 10 cm. at the pressure in
an X-ray tube (10-* mm. of mercury)), the laws which hold are quite
diferent. The molecules then fly practically straight from one wall
of the containing vessel to the other without colliding with other
molecules. Thus, for example, if there is a difference of temperature
between two opposite parts of the wall of the container, they carry
heat energy directly from one wall to the other. The quantity of heat
transferred is then proportional to the number of molecules; n no
longer disappears from the transport equation, as the mean free path
no longer enters into it. The laws of heat conduction, viscosity, &c.,
at low pressures have been especially studied by Knudsen. They are
of great practical importance, for instance, in connexion with the
working of air pumps (such as Gaede's rotary molecular pump and
the diffusion pump).
We shall now briefly consider the problem of diffusion. We imagine
a mixture of two gases in dynamical equilibrium, ie. the pressure, and
hence n, the total number of molecules per cubic centimetre, are to be
the same throughout. Here the property A is ny/n, the concentration
of one kind of molecule, or nan, the concentration of the other kind
of molecule. Then the transport equation gives the number (Z1) of
molecules of the frst kind, or the number (Za) of molecules of the
second kind, that diffuse through unit area in unit time:
dz
dz
If the phenomenon is a steady one, ny + no must be equal to a con-
stant n, i.e. dn /dz= - dna/dz; then the total flow Z, + Z2 is zero.


===== PDF PAGE 0293 =====

APPENDIX III
265
The two kinds of molecule have the same diffusion constant & = ol,
which in virtue of the factor l is inversely proportional to n, the total
number of molecules.
III. Van der Waals' Equation of State (p. 20).
As compared with the equation of state for perfect gases, van der
Waals' equation of state for actual gases, given in the text (p. 20),
contains two correction terms, a volume correction and a pressure
correction. Here we shall seek to show, at least qualitatively, how
these terms arise.
(1) The fact that in the equation of state, as is stated in the text,
exactly four times the total volume of the molecules themselves must
be subtracted from the total volume of the gas, may be explained as
follows. In § 6 (p. 9) we investigated the probability that n mole-
cules should be distributed in a given way among the cells w, w2....
We found it to be the product of the number of ways in which a definite
distribution, prescribed by the numbers ny, na... of the molecules
occupying the individual cells, can be realized and the a priori proba-
bility of the occurrence of this distribution. It is with this a priori
probability that we are concerned here. If we inquire into the proba-
bility that n molecules will be found in a definite portion of volume v,
we begin by assuming, as was done in § 6 (p. 9), that the probability
is proportional to un. This is assuredly the case so long as we can
neglect the finite magnitude of the gas molecules, as, e.g., in rarefied
gases. It is not so, however, for high pressures, where the gas mole-
cules are so tightly packed together that their own volume is actually
comparable with that of the space available for them. Here we obtain
the desired result in the following way. Let um be the volume of a
molecule (ie. for a spherical molecule Um = ET(20)3, where o denotes
the diameter of the molecule). Now the centres of two molecules
cannot approach within a distance equal to the diameter of a mole-
cule; hence each molecule has an effective volume of magnitude
§to = 80m, independent of the particular shape which the molecule
happens to have.
The probability that a molecule will be found in a definite portion
of volume v is of course proportional to v, as above. If we introduce
a second molecule into this region, the space available for it is only
U - 8Uni the space left for a third molecule is o - 2 x 8Um, and so
on. The probability of finding n molecules in v, then, is proportional,
not to v", but to the product
0/0-80m) (0-2X80m)..10 -(n-1)80m);


===== PDF PAGE 0294 =====

266
APPENDIX IV
v is accordingly replaced by the n-th root of this product.
We can
easily calculate this; as Um is very small and 80mn still small in com-
parison with v, we can replace the product approximately by
80m n"
+0--80m-30m61+2t.+(1-1)20271-
2 )
Taking the n-th root of this, we see that if the finite volume of the
molecules is to be taken into account v must be replaced by
10 m)
=0-b,
where b stands for 1n0m, four times the actual volume of the molecules
contained in v.
(2) The term a added to the pressure may be explained as
follows. If there are forces of cohesion acting between the molecules,
one element of volume acts on another of equal size with a force which
is proportional to n', where n is the number of molecules per cubic
centimetre. The pressure exerted by the gas on an external body is
correspondingly less than it would be if there were no forces of cohesion.
Hence in the equation of state p must be replaced by p + An?. Now
let nV = N be the total number of molecules in the volume of gas V;
this number of course does not vary if the volume is changed, so that
the additional term An' may be written in the form A
The
constant a accordingly is closely related to the energy of cohesion of
the gas, and we may mention that the magnitude of the latent heat
of evaporation of liquids also depends on it. Van der Waals' equation
is still approximately true even for densities which correspond to the
liquid state, and enables the phenomenon of liquefaction to be investi-
gated thermodynamically.
IV. The Mean Square Deviation (p. 21).
All phenomena involving deviation from a mean value depend on
the formula
An? = n.
Here n may denote, e.g., the number of particles in a definite fixed
portion of volume of a gas. If we stick to this example, we know that
this number is not always the same but varies with the time. There is,
however, a time-average (n) of n, about which the number of particles


===== PDF PAGE 0295 =====

APPENDIX IV
267
varies. If we could observe the actual number n at any instant (as if
in a snapshot), we should obtain varying values n,, Nz.., deviating
from the mean value n by the amounts An = n1-Ñ, Anz= n2-0,...
The sum of these deviations for a large number of observations, divided
by their number, must of course vanish; a result differing from zero,
however, is obtained if we average the squares of these deviations over
a large number of observations. We thus obtain the mean square
deviation An', which according to the assertion made above is equal
to the mean value n.
To prove this, we start from the fundamental formula of the kinetic
theory of gases, according to which the probability that of N molecules
in a total volume V the fraction n will be found in the portion of volume
o is given by the formula
Wn =
(cf. p. 12: instead of the distribution among the cells w,, wa,....
we here have the distribution between the two regions o and V - 1
with "occupation numbers" n1=N and ng =N-n). The sum of
all the probabilities of the various distributions is IWn = 1 (by the
binomial theorem). The mean number (n) of molecules in o is
obtained by working out the sum
n=0
If we put o/V = x, this sum becomes
nN!
_X" (1 - X)V-n
n= 0n!(N - n)!
(N - 1)!
= Nx E
- XM-1(1 -X)(N-1) -(n-1).
n= 1 (n - 1)! [(N - 1) - (n— 1)]!
According to the binomial theorem the sum here is again equal to 1,
so that for n, the mean number of particles, we obtain the expression
No
T= NX=V'
as might be expected. In order to calculate n?, we note that the mean
value n(n - 1) may be found in exactly the same way as n. In fact,


===== PDF PAGE 0296 =====

268
APPENDIX IV
n(n — 1) = Lin(n - 1)Wn
n =0
(N - 2)!
n= 2 (n- 2)![(N-2) -(n-2)]!
X2-2(1-X)(-2) - (1-2),
whence
n(n - 1) = N(IN - 1)∞?.
Hence we at once have
n° = n(n - 1) + n = N(N - 1)x? + Nx,
so that
If we confine ourselves to small values of x, i.e. to relatively small
volumes v, we at once obtain the deviation formula
given above. Many other mean values can be calculated in exactly the
same way as n and n?.
These formula are applied as follows. Spontaneous deviations of
the density of the molecules from the mean value are associated with
a change in almost all the physical properties of the gas. For example,
variations of density in a gas are associated with variations in the
refractive index. By observing the variations of measurable proper-
ties we can determine the mean square deviation. For example, the
variation of the refractive index gives rise to a scattering of the trans-
mitted light, which is proportional to the mean square deviation
(to this, according to Lord Rayleigh, is due the blue colour of the sky).
In the Brownian movement, too, fine particles in suspension execute
certain motions as a result of variations in the density of the sur-
rounding medium, and these motions are a measure of the mean square
deviation of the density of the surrounding medium. If we know the
way in which the phenomenon in question is related to the density,
the mean value of the number of particles (n) can be determined by
measuring the deviations and calculating the mean square deviation.
An important field of application of the theory of deviations is the
subject of radioactivity. Here it is a question of counting the number
of particles emitted by a radioactive preparation per second (e.g. by
means of a Geiger counting apparatus (p. 32)). If we are dealing
with a long-lived substance, for which the average number (n) of


===== PDF PAGE 0297 =====

APPENDIX V
269
particles emitted per second may be regarded as constant, the actual
number (n) of particles emitted in individual periods of one second
will difter from ñ. The fact that the deviations are in accordance with
the law stated above, An? = n, forms a convincing proof of the statis-
tical nature of the disintegration process.
Corresponding formula
can also be deduced for short-lived radioactive substances.
V. Theory of Relativity (p. 27).
In classical mechanics it is proved that an observer who experi
ments only within a closed system cannot determine whether this
system is at rest or is in uniform motion. In fact, the Newtonian
equations of motion md-x/dt? = I (where m is the mass, I the force,
x the co-ordinate of a particle, and t
- S,
the time) remain unchanged if we
pass to a moving co-ordinate system
by the transformation x'=x-Ut,
provided the force depends only on
the position of the particle relative
to the co-ordinate system (since
Xy - Xx' = X1-Xz). This principle
Qo-
of relativity in mechanics has to be
modified when electromagnetic pro-
O, source of light;
Fig. X.-Diagram of Michelson's interferon stars
P, semi-transparent, silvered
plate; S'1, So, mirrors; T, telescope.
cesses, light waves for example, are taken into account. Since
these waves move in vacuo, it was the custom to assume a carrier,
the other. The earth moves through it, so that an observer on
the earth must perceive an "ather wind", which retards or
accelerates the light waves according to their direction. The experi-
ment was carried out by means of Michelson's interferometer (fig. 1).
A light ray from the source @ was divided into two parts by partial
reflection at the thinly silvered glass plate P; the two partial rays
were reflected at the mirrors S,, Sy and united again at the plate P.
Interference fringes are seen in the telescope T. If the apparatus is
then turned round so that first PS,, then PS,, fall in the direction of
the ather wind, the interference fringes ought to be displaced. The
result of the experiment was negative: the ether wind is not really
there.
To explain this fact Einstein developed his theory of relativity.


===== PDF PAGE 0298 =====

270
APPENDIX V
The leading idea is that the customary combination of space and time
-kinematics-must be abandoned. There is no absolute time, but
just as every moving system has its "proper" co-ordinates x, y, 2,
so it has also a proper time t, which has to be transformed as well as
the co-ordinates when we pass to a new system. The equations de-
fining this so-called Lorentz transformation for two systems moving
in the x-direction with the relative velocity v are
x' =-
X -vt
t - vx/ca
Y' = y, 2 = 7, t'=
V(1-08/02)
V (1 - 08/02)
where c is the velocity of light. It is easily verified that these equations
give
x"? - c-t'2 = x? — c?t?.
This formula suggests that x, y, z, ict (i = V -1) may be interpreted
(Minkowski) as co-ordinates in a four-dimensional space, in which
x2+ y2 + 2+(ict)' represents the square of the distance from the
origin; a Lorentz transformation then represents a rotation round the
origin in this space. Minkowski's idea has developed into a geometrical
view of the fundamental laws of physics, culminating in the inclusion
of gravitation in Einstein's so-called general theory of relativity.
Physically, the equation last written expresses the fact that x = ct
implies x'= ct; or that the velocity of light is independent of the
motion of the observer. The negative result of Michelson's experiment
is thus explained.
Further, we see that if the distance of two points is xy - X, at the
same time t in one system (x, t), then in a second system (x', t) their
distance is
Thus
Hence lengths in the second system appear from the first system to
be shortened (the Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction). On the other
hand, if ty, tz are the times of two events at the same place x in the
first system, then
ty'- tz' = (ty-tz)/V(1 - 02/03),
so that the time between the two events seems longer from the
second system (cf. p. 271).
It must be assumed that there is no velocity greater than the
velocity of light otherwise the theory would become meaningless.


===== PDF PAGE 0299 =====

APPENDIX V
27I
It follows that the basic ideas of mechanics must be so altered that the
motion of a body can never be accelerated up to the velocity of light.
We can arrive at this result from the consideration that the velocity
defined by the components dx/dt, dy/dt, dz/dt (or the momentum
obtained from this velocity on multiplication by the mass) cannot,
in view of Lorentz's transformation, be regarded as a vector, since
the differential dt in the denominator is also transformed. We obtain
a serviceable "covariant" definition if we replace dt by dt, where
at is the element of the "proper" time of the particle, i.e. the time
measured in the system of reference in which the particle is at rest.
The relation between dt and dt is found by taking the derivative of t',
1-v x
at'
& đt
đt
=
V (1 - 03/03)'
and putting dx/dt = v; dt then becomes dio, and we have
dto = V (1 - 02/02) dt.
The component momentum is now defined to be
mo
mo
= m
V (1 - 07/02) dt
đt'
where mo is a constant, the rest mass. The mass m is therefore given
by the formula of the text, m = mo/V (1 - v/c). The formula has
been confirmed, not only by the experiments with cathode rays already
mentioned (p. 27), but also by certain details in the behaviour of
spectral lines, particularly those of hydrogen. In fact, since such lines
are emitted by rapidly moving electrons, they reflect the mechanical
properties of these electrons (p. 107). The energy is
moc?
E = me? -
V (1 - 02/02)'
and the momentum is
G = mU==
V1 - 07/07)
From these two expressions we find
the relation which is used in Chap. III, § 1, p. 59, in the discussion on


===== PDF PAGE 0300 =====

272
APPENDIX VI
the existence of the neutrino. The values of E and G therefore deter-
mine the rest mass.
If the latter vanishes, as it does for a light
quantum (photon, § 2, p. 69), El and G are connected by the relation
cG = E.
VI. Electron Theory (p. 41).
Maxwell's equations, for an isotropic substance, are:
12D
•— curl H = -
i, div D = 4mp, D = eE;
1 дв
i at
• + curlE = 0,
dit B = 0,
B = uH.
We assume the reader to be acquainted with the vector notation, and
the meaning of the vectors E, H, D, B, i, as also with the energy
theorem
aw
-
đe =/ Sado + 4,
where W = (1/87)fff(eE?+ uH?) dadydz is the electromagnetic energy;
A = SifiEdadydz is the rate of doing work by the electric force on
the currents; and S = (c/1m)[EH] is the Poynting vector, of which
use is made in Appendix VIII, p. 275.
Lorentz's theory of the electron considers fields in vacuo only, and
therefore puts € = M= I; the current is assumed to be a convection
current, i = po, the charge being rigidly bound to the electron. To
connect the theory with mechanics, it is further necessary to assume
that the field exerts the mechanical force
on the electron.
In the author's new feld theory Maxwell's equations are retained,
but e and u are given by the equations *
me: +11+186180-29)
(in the text, for brevity, HI is written in place of B); the
* We consider here the theory in its original form; it has been modified by adding
a term * (EB)? under the square root, which has no influence on the statical solution.


===== PDF PAGE 0301 =====

APPENDIX VI
273
electrons are taken to be point charges (p = i = 0). The energy is
the Poynting vector
5==[DB] =€
ATT
In the statical case we have H = B = 0, so that
E
D = €E =
For a point singularity, it follows from div D = O that
and hence that
e
a' =
Vot + at)'
The field E therefore remains finite even at the centre of the electron,
where it has the value
Eo =.
Since the field equations reduce to curl E = 0, a potential d exists,
which is found from E = —ap/or to be
"la V(1+x*)°
For r » a, p is easily seen to reduce to the Coulomb potential e/r;
but for r = 0 it is finite,
8(0) = 1-8511%
If we substitute the expression for E in the energy formula
we find
N=39410) -1-2386286


===== PDF PAGE 0302 =====

274
APPENDIX VII
Einstein's theorem W= mc? is here rigorously true, but the proof
would take us too far. Equating mc' to the value of W given above, we
get a = 1-2361 e/mc°, which, on introducing the empirical values for the
charge and the mass of the electron, comes out as a = 2•28 x 10-13 cm.
The absolute field is b =e/a = 9-18 X 1015 e.s.u. It can be shown
that the equations of motion given by Lorentz in the classical theory,
- (mo)=eE+
hold here rigorously for a constant external electromagnetic field, and
approximately for a field which does not vary appreciably over the
"diameter of the electron" 2a. For quickly vibrating fields there are
deviations, namely a diminution of the force. It may be that this
result can be applied to the explanation of the extremely high pene-
trating power of cosmic radiation (8 7, p. 41), which is much less
absorbed than the usual theories predict.
The adaptation of these ideas to the principles of quantum theory
and the introduction of the spin has been carried out to some extent,
but still meets with great difficulties.
VII. The Theorem of the Inertia of Energy (p. 47).
Here we give the mathematical proof corresponding to the ideal
experiment given in the text. Classical electrodynamics, in agreement
with experiment, yields the result that the momentum transferred by
light of energy E to a surface absorbing it is E/c (ct. Appendix XXVII,
p. 329); hence the momentum transferred by recoil to the box during
the emission is of the same magnitude. If the box (tig. 1, p. 16) has the
total mass M, it acquires a recoil velocity o to the left, given accord-
ing to the theorem of the conservation of momentum by Mo = E/c.
The box continues to move during the time required by the light to
traverse the distance (L) between the transmitter (I) and the receiver
(II). If we neglect terms of higher order, this time t is equal to l/c.
During this time the box moves a distance x = vt = El/Mc to
the left. In order not to contradict the fundamental principle of
the centre of gravity we must assume, as was explained in the text,
that the transference of energy from I to Il is accompanied by a
simultaneous transference of mass in the same direction. If we denote
this meanwhile unknown mass by m, then the total moment due to
displacement of mass after the phenomenon is given by Mx - mi;
by the fundamental principle of the centre of gravity this must be zero.


===== PDF PAGE 0303 =====

APPENDIX VIII
275
Substituting for x the value found above, we obtain Einstein's formula
for m:
E
VIII. Calculation of the Coefficient of Scattering for Radiation of
Short Wave-length (p. 48).
In order to calculate the coefficient of scattering we start from the
familiar formula for the radiation from a dipole antenna. According
to Hertz, the field of a dipole of moment p is given by
sin 0.
cap
The electric vector is at right angles to the magnetic vector and both
are at right angles to the direction in which the radiation is propa-
gated; @ is the angle between the direction of propagation of the
radiation and the direction in which the dipole is oscillating, and r
the distance from the dipole. A necessary assumption for the validity
of this formula is that i must be very much greater than the wave-
length of the radiation emitted, or, in other words, the above formula
is valid only for the so-called wave zone.
To apply the formula to our case of a vibrating particle, we note
that this represents an oscillating electric dipole of moment p — es.,
where s is the displacement of the electron at any instant from its
position of equilibrium. Then the energy radiated per second in a
specified direction is given by the Poynting vector, the length of which is
S=
- sin?0.
4 т
4TC3n2
The total energy radiated in unit time is obtained by integrating this
over the whole surface of a sphere:
As
87p2
3
the total radiation is given by
2 e?
3 08 513.


===== PDF PAGE 0304 =====

276
APPENDIX IX
This formula still contains the displacement of the oscillating electron,
o, more accurately, its second derivative with respect to the time.
This is determined by the equation of motion of the electron under the
influence of the incident radiation:
ms = eE.
Eo, the electric vector of the primary wave, however, is connected
with the intensity of the incident radiation by the equation
ATT
If we substitute these expressions in the equation above, the formula
for the energy received by the electron from the primary wave and
transformed into scattered radiation becomes
8тт (
E2 =
Io.
3c8 m=
mc?
As the mass of the scattering particle occurs squared in the denomi-
nator, we see that a proton or an
atomic nucleus scatters some millions
of times less than an electron.
IX. Rutherford's Scattering Formula
for a-rays (p. 53).
—_-
_E
- - -
According to Rutherford, the nu-
cleus of an atom (with charge Le)
and an a-particle (with charge E and
Fig. 2.-Hyperbolic path in the scattering of an
a-ray by a nucleus; a and b are the semi-axes,
€ the
distance between the centre and the focus.
The angle
of deflection is @ =1 - 20.
mass M) repel one another with the Coulomb force ZeEp. If we
consider the heavy nucleus as at rest, the a-particle describes an orbit
(fig. 2) which is one branch of a hyperbola, one of whose foci coincides
with the nucleus K. Let b be the distance of the nucleus from the
asymptote of the hyperbola which would be described by the a-particle
if there were no repulsive force. Further, we denote the distance of
the nucleus K from the vertex of the hyperbola by q; then


===== PDF PAGE 0305 =====

APPENDIX IX
277
where e denotes the linear eccentricity OK (i.e. the distance between
the centre O and the focus K), and f the angle between the asymp-
tote and the axis. From fig. 2 we readily see that
€ = -
sin 0
and hence that
9 =
sin o
b is obviously equal to the length of the minor semi-axis of the
hyperbola.
In the first place we shall seek to find a relation between the " col-
lision parameter " & and the angle of deviation 4, which, as we see
from the figure, is equal to " — 20. We accordingly apply the laws
of motion to the a-particle. First we have the theorem of the conser-
vation of energy: the sum of the kinetic energy and the potential
energy is constant. At a very great distance from the nucleus the
a-particle has kinetic energy only; let its velocity there be v. If we
equate this energy to the total energy at the instant when the electron
is passing the vertex of the hyperbola, we have
ZeE
AMN = MU+
9
or, if we divide by ¿Mu and for short put k = ZeE/Mv,
2k
sin 0
Further, we have the theorem of the conservation of angular
momentum, in virtue of which
MUb = MUg,
or
sin o
0 = =
*I + cos®'
sin?
1 - cos 0
(*3) =
(I + cos 8)2=
I + cos 6°
Substituting this value in the above equation and carrying out a few
transformations, we have
6
sin o
-= tant,
cos o
(E 908)
19


===== PDF PAGE 0306 =====

278
APPENDIX IX
or, since = 1 - 20,
6 = k cot
2°
This gives the angle of deviation as a function of b, the distance of the
rectilinear prolongation of the path of the a-particle (the asymptote)
from the nucleus.
It is now easy to calculate how many a-particles in an incident
parallel beam are deviated by a specified amount. We imagine a
plane E at right angles to the
incident beam and at a great
distance from K; C is the foot
of the perpendicular from K to
E (fig. 3). It is obvious that
-
all the a-particles which pass
-
through a ring of E formed by
Fig- 3.-Relative frequency, in a definite
ingular region, of scattering of «-particles by
nucleus.
two circles with radii b and b + db will be subject to a deviation
between d and d + dd. If one particle passes through one square
centimetre of E in one second, the number passing through the ring
in question will be
dn = 2mbdb,
where
db = kd(cot d/2) = -
2 sin? /2
Hence
This is the number of particles deviated through an angle between
d and d + db; they are uniformly distributed over a zone of a unit
sphere, the area of the zone being 2m sinpd. Hence W(p), the
number of a-particles deviated into a unit of area of the unit
sphere, is an/2m sin ddd, so that the probability of deviation per
unit solid angle is
W(
This is Rutherford's scattering formula. Each relationship (between


===== PDF PAGE 0307 =====

APPENDIX X
279
Z, M, v, ф) contained in it can be tested experimentally by counting
the scattered a-particles; the v-relation, it is true, can only be investi-
gated experimentally over a small region, as the range of velocity
available with naturally occurring a-particles is small. In general
the agreement between the formula and experimental results is ex-
tremely accurate; with light atoms, of course, we must take into
account the recoil of the nucleus K after collision with the a-particle,
which is easily done. Marked discrepancies have been found only in
the case of almost central collisions (deviations of almost 180º) of
light atoms (which have low nuclear charges, so that the incident
a-particle approaches the nucleus very closely); here, however, we
shall not go into further details.
As the charge and mass of the a-particles are known (they are
Hett ions, for which M = 4M,, E = 2e) and their velocities can be
determined from deflection experiments, the formula can be used to
find the nuclear charge Z. For this we need only know the number
of scattering atoms per unit volume and count the number of a-particles
in the presence and absence of the scattering layer. For example,
accurate experiments by Chadwick gave the following values for Z:
Platinum
Silver
Copper
77•4
46•3
29•3,
while according to the periodic table the numbers should be
78
47
29.
The excellent agreement between the two sets of figures confirms the
basic assumption that the nuclear charge and the atomic number are
identical.
X. The Compton Effect (p. 75).
Here we shall investigate the collision between a light quantum
and an electron, on the assumptions of the special theory of relativity.
This procedure is appropriate for our purpose, as it does not make
the calculations any more complicated, while on the other hand the
result obtained is then valid for the scattering even of very hard
radiation.
The calculations are based on the theorems of the conservation
of energy and of momentum. The energy of the light quantum
before the collision is hr, its momentum ho/c; the corresponding
quantities after the collision we shall call he and hole. For
the sake of simplicity we shall regard the electron as it rest


===== PDF PAGE 0308 =====

280
APPENDIX X
previous to the collision; in this case its energy will be equal to the
rest-energy mc corresponding by Einstein's formula to the rest-mass
mo, while its momentum will be zero. Let o be the velocity of
mo
the electron after the collision; then its mass m will be (1 - 08/08)
its energy ma will be l- 8/ay and its momentum mo will be
V (1 - 02/02)
We may also say that after collision the electron has
the "kinetic energy"
1
(m -mo)c=mc-
-1)
1V (1 - 0203)
(which, as we easily see by expanding in powers
Lie.
of o/c, agrees with the formula Em of non-
relativistic mechanics when the velocity is
small), while before collision this "kinetic
energy" is zero.
1g. 4. Momentum diagrar
or the Compton effec
Then if d is the angle of deviation of the
light quantum and i the angle of deviation of
the electron, the theorems of the conservation of energy and of
momentum take the following forms (see fig. 4):
Conservation of energy: hu + mc' = hi + mc?;
=
- coso + mu cosy,
Conservation of momentum:
c sind - mo siny.
Eliminating & from the last two equations, we obtain
Again, from the energy equation we have
Since
m° =
= mo',
by definition, subtracting one of these equations from the other gives


===== PDF PAGE 0309 =====

APPENDIX XI
or
(1-0090) mo
If for convenience we denote the quantity
_ = 0•0242 A.
moc
(which is in general referred to as the Compton wave-length) by d,
the above equation can also be written in the form
which was given in the text.
XI. Phase Velocity and Group Velocity (p. 78).
In order to give a strict proof of the relationship U = du/ûr given
in the text, we in the first instance consider the most general form of a
group of waves; it must have the form of a Fourier integral
where v = vT) is to be regarded as a function of the wave-number t.
We now assume that the group is very narrow, so that in the
integral there occur only those waves of finite amplitude whose wave-
numbers differ from the mean wave-number to by a very small amount.
If we put + == To + 11, 4(T) ==% + 4(71), and a(to + T1) = 6(11), the
wave-group may be written in the form
where
Hence the wave-group may be regarded as a single wave of frequency
wave-number to, and amplitude 1(x,t) varying from point to
point and moment to moment. This assumption is justified, as accord-
ing to our assumption 1(x, t) is a function which varies only slowly
compared with the exponential function emiliat-To;
to i first
approximation it varies
in the rhythm of a mean of the beat
frequencies vy, which are very small compared with yo
The velocity with which a definite value of the amplitude A(x, t),


===== PDF PAGE 0310 =====

282
APPENDIX XII
e.g. its maximum, advances with the wave is called the group velocity.
This is accordingly found from the relation
aA dx + ot
дА
• = 0
дх dt
obtained by differentiating the equation A(x, t) = const. with respect
to the time. If we call the group velocity U to distinguish it from the
phase velocity, we have
U =
(dx)
dt / A = const
Now obviously
дА
дА
Do - 2r 6(71 7827141 1) 1.
As we have assumed that the group is confined to a very narrow range
of wave-length, we can expand vI(T1) in powers of T1:
4(73) =1(7) - 40=(22)
TIT....
Hence
and for the group velocity we accordingly have
while the phase velocity is given by
и =
XII. Elementary Derivation of Heisenberg's Uncertainty Relation.
We consider a wave packet of finite width. For the sake of simplicity
we represent its amplitude at any moment by a Gauss error function
(such as actually occurs in the ground state of the harmonic oscillator,
Appendix XXXII, p. 343):
f(x) = Ae-x'la?;
then Ax the width is given by
Ax = V* = La.


===== PDF PAGE 0311 =====

APPENDIX XII
283 1
The Fourier representation of f(x) is
where
4(0) =S-oI(2) - 3rix doc
is the amplitude of a partial harmonic wave with the wave number t.
Introducing the expression of f(x) in ((t) we have
4(8) =15 1871274 min) doo
e-(ala+ria)' dx.
This integral is transformed by the substitution x/a + rita = y into
the Gauss integral
Therefore
where
1
6=
-.
TrOL
The distribution of the elementary waves composing the wave packet
f(x) is again & Gauss function with the half width b = 1/7d. Putting
Ax = 34, At = 16, one has Ax. At =1 and introducing the mo-
mentun p = hT:
hi
Air. Ap = At?
which is the exact expression of Hrisenberg's uncertainty law for the
special wave packet (see Appendix XXXII, p. 313). It is evident that
with respect to order of magnitude the relation Ax. Ap ~ k holds for
any form of the wave packet. We shall prove the inequality with an
exact numerical cooflicient later (see Appondix XXI, p. 312).
XIII. Hamiltonian Theory and Action Variables (p. 101).
Here we shall briefly consider the mechanics of multiply periodic
motions and the corresponding quantum conditions.
According to
Hamilton, the motion of a system is described completely by stating
the energy as a function of the co-ordinates i and the momenta ps
the so-called Hamiltonian function H(g1, 42, . .., Pa, P1, Pz,...). (For
ordinary rectangular co-ordinates the momentum Pk
becomes mili


===== PDF PAGE 0312 =====

284
APPENDIX XIII
here, as in what follows, the dot denotes differentiation with respect
to the time.) The equations of motion are then
9 70 =
P% = - 09н
From these the theorem of the conservation of energy follows imme-
diately; for if we form the total differential coefficient of Il with re-
spect to the time, and make use of the equations of motion, we have
di - 8/011.
= 0,
k 10910
that is, the energy of the system, H(97, Pk) = E, is constant.
In general we can replace the pair of variables (Pk, Qk) by an
arbitrary pair of canonically conjugate variables, where we define
canonical variables by the fact that they satisfy equations of the
type of the equations of motion given above. The investigation of
such canonical transformations leads to a mathematical problem (the
so-called Hamilton-Jacobi differential equation) which in many cases
can be solved. Here we shall assume that a solution can be found.
Then the problem of integrating the equations of motion may be
stated in the following form: to find new canonical variables
(J W%), such that the energy depends on the quantities x only, not
on the quantitie us. Then by the cquations of motion i = — Dus
so that I, is constant throughout the motion. On the other hand,
W% = V7 =
- is also constant as time goes on, owing to the constancy
0J 16
of the quantities I and we increases linearly with the time:
WK = Vit.
Thus the integration problem is solved in the new co-
ordinates, and it only remains to make the reverse transformation.
A system is said to be singly or multiply periodie if the variables
just defined can be found such that each rectangular co-ordinate is
periodic in the quantities we, i.e. can be represented as a Fourier series
in terms of these variables w,,..., Wi, so that, th, t2... being
positive or negative integers,
T1, T2, ...
T1, Ta, .
The coefficients are, Ter
are then functions of the quantities Jk If the
motion is periodic, the quantities Ji are said to be action variables and
the quantities wy angle variables. We have already had an example


===== PDF PAGE 0313 =====

APPENDIX XIII
285
of this kind in the rotator, where the azimuth , and the angular momen-
tum p were taken as canonical co-ordinates. Then the Hamiltonian
function is H = P2
whence there follow the equations of motion
ф= бр
•= 0. These have the solutions p= const.
and d = wt. The rectangular co-ordinate is then given by
Х = de'$ = aewt.
Ehrenfest has proved that the action variables
Ji are adiabatic
invariants, i.e. that the quantities Jy can be quantised.
We now postu-
late the quantum conditions
J7 = h2707
(Ny an integer).
We can, however, only set up as many conditions of this kind as there
are incommensurable frequencies in the motion. This may be seen
as follows. By way of example we consider the case of two degrees of
freedom; the index in the Fourier series then contains the sum
P1T1 + 1272, where T1, To are integers. If, e.g., v1 = Kv, where k is an
integer, UTI + VT2 = valiT,+ T2). Now litt Ta can take any
integral value, since t, and ta are integers. In reality, therefore, we
have only a single periodic motion and a single periodic Fourier series,
and it is clear that in these circumstances only one quantum condition
can exist. This case is referred to as degeneracy.
The canonical variables J, and w, can be conveniently determined
in the case where the system is separable, i.e. once the equations of
motion have been solved each p/ depends only on the corresponding lic
Here it may be shown that the action variable J corresponding to
the kth period is given by
J=Spides
where the integral is to be taken over the whole period. Hence in the
case of separable co-ordinates the quantum condition may be stated
at once:
Without further examination these conditions do not reveal whether
degeneracy is present or not. Hence before applying them it is neces-
sary to investigate carefully what the actual number of incommen-
surable periods in the system is. Frequently, however, it is convenient


===== PDF PAGE 0314 =====

286
APPENDIX XIV
to take no notice of this (Sommerfeld) and simply to write down super-
fuous quantum conditions. Then the physically observable quantities
like energy, momentum, &c., depend only on certain combinations of
the quantum numbers ny, ng,..., so that they may be expressed by
a smaller number of integers; thus contradictions cannot arise. This
method has the following additional advantage: if a degenerate system
is perturbed, e.g. by an external electric or magnetic field, the degeneracy
is in general removed and there appears a new fundamental period,
incommensurable with the former periods. If the unperturbed system
has been discussed by means of suitable variables involving a super-
fluous period, and the perturbations are small, the quantum conditions
can be taken over direct from the unperturbed case. We shall meet
with an example of this in connexion with the Kepler problem.
XIV. Quantisation of the Elliptic Orbits in Bohr's Theory (pp. 92, 107).
The quantisation of the elliptic orbits in the Bohr atom is carried
out here by means of the method, described in the previous section,
of over-quantising the system by using more periods to describe the
motion than it actually has.
We have first to write down the classical laws of motion for two
particles of masses m and M and charges — e and Ze which attract one
another according to Coulomb's law. (These correspond exactly to
the laws of motion in astronomy, except that there the attracting
co-ordinates of the electron and the nucleus respectively, W, the energy
of the motion, is given by
Ze?
If we regard the centre of gravity of the system as at rest, then
mx. + Mx, is zero; introducing the relative co-ordinates (x, y, z),
where x = Xz -X1, &c., as new variables, we have
-M
m
XI =
M+m
- ma, x2=M +m
- x.
Similarly for the corresponding components of the velocity. The
corresponding term of the kinetic energy is then
where u is the so-called effective mass mM/(m + M); cf. the discussion
of the motion of the nucleus in § 1, p. 96. Hence the problem


===== PDF PAGE 0315 =====

APPENDIX. XIV
287
may be treated as a Kepler problem for the relative motion about the
centre of gravity with co-ordinates (x, y, z) and eftective mass u.
For such motions about a fixed centre the conservation of angular
momentum (theorem of areas) holds as well as the conservation of
energy. The former implies in the first place that the motion is all in
one plane. We take this plane as the xy-plane and transform to polar
co-ordinates by means of the equations x = r cosd, y = r sin p.
The
momentum theorem then gives
Mr = P% = const.
In polar co-ordinates the energy is
W = 24(3 + p363) - Ze?
= const.
Eliminating & between these two equations and noting that
= Run do
we have
11
Ze?
Here it is advantageous to introduce the new variable p = 1/r; for
p we then have the differential equation
W- (16) -03)
- Zep.
This may readily be solved by ditterentiating once more with respect
to d; rejecting the factor do/d, we have the difierential equation of
the second order
ip + p-
Ze°u
- = (.
dd"
As is well known, its general solution is
Zeree
p=
+- С' соя (ф— фо),
p,°
containing the two constants C and do; by suitable choice of & the
latter can always be made to vanish.
If for brevity we also put
Сро3
q==.
-,
€ = Cg =


===== PDF PAGE 0316 =====

288
APPENDIX XIV
we have
*==1+20osd
As we know, this equation represents a conic. In order that the motion
may be periodic, i.e. in order that the conic may be entirely at a finite
distance, the denominator in the above polar equation must never
vanish; that is, | € must be less than 1. Perihelion, i.e. the minimum
value of r, corresponds to the azimuth @ = then then 11=
Aphelion
1+€
corresponds to p=п: 72==
From these we obtain the expression
for the major semi-axis a. For = I/2, ris equal to the semi-latus-
rectum q of the ellipse (see fig. 8, p. 107). Further, we readily see that e
is the numerical eccentricity and that the minor semi-axis is given by
b= V-a: The energy of the motion is obtained by substituting
from the equation of the ellipse in the previous expression for W; we have
- Zep
e=z
=128 09+24°7-2584--
Za'
which is the same as the result for a circular orbit (p. 92) if we
replace the radius by the major semi-axis.
Now, although there is only one period, we prescribe two quantum
conditions
$p, dr = n'h, Sp, do = 1h.
Owing to the constancy of Po, the second condition at once gives
P6 = 2k.
The first integral, however, is not so easy to calculate; here we have
dr p
dr
He (a) 3


===== PDF PAGE 0317 =====

APPENDIX XIV
289
Accordingly, we have to evaluate the integral
do =
• (d) 2b=33
for a complete revolution, i.e. & runs from 0 to 2m. Integrating by
parts, we have
€ sin d
I=
€ COS$
€ COS$
1 + ECOS$
I _ € COS
Multiplying the second expression by +2 and the first by -1
adding, we obtain
I =-
(1 + € COS d)?
27 1 + 2E cOsp+ e cos?@ do +
= -
- 1-8
(1 + € COS$)?
(1 + € cosd)?
The first of these integrals can be evaluated at once and gives - 2m;
the second, in virtue of the equation of the ellipse, may be written in
the form
1 - 6?
(1 + € COSO"
(1 - €2)
This form of expression shows that apart from the factor
the integral represents twice the area of the elliptical orbit, which, as
we know, is rab, where a and b are the semi-axes of the ellipse. Sub-
stituting the values previously found for the latter and collecting
terms, we find that the first quantum condition gives
2ПР$
n't = 274 +24-
1-827(1-6218725
-hk+
V(1-e2)
or
= Are Zua = h'(n' + k)?.
1 - €2
If we put
n' + i=n,
we have
han?
a=-


===== PDF PAGE 0318 =====

290
APPENDIX XIV
so that the energy is
e?Z
E = -
Rh
=-
2a
=-
han?
Thus by an argument based on Bohr's theory we have obtained the
Balmer term with the correct coefficient.
In deducing this we began by introducing two quantum conditions
and hence two quantum numbers, the radial quantum number n'
and the azimuthal quantum number k. As the orbit has only one period,
however, it is found unnecessary to use both quantum numbers in
finding the energy levels, as the latter involve only the sum of the two
quantum numbers. This we call the principal quantum number, as
in the unperturbed motion it alone determines the positions of the
terms.
The significance of the two other quantum numbers only becomes
evident if the degeneracy is removed by some perturbation (due to
deviations from the Coulomb field, introduction of the relativistic
variation of mass, presence of an external field, or some other cause).
We can, however, gain an idea of the meaning of the quantum numbers
from the purely geometrical point of view by considering the elliptic
orbit. If, as in § 1 (p. 99), we denote the radius of the first circular
Bohr orbit for Z = 1 by
00 =
the major semi-axis of the ellipse is
a =-
ao n°.
Using the formula above, we similarly obtain the values
6 =
do noki, 1=
00 762
Z
for the minor semi-axis and the semi-latus-rectum. The ratio of the
axes, b/a, is accordingly equal to k/n. Ifn = k, we obtain the circular
orbits of the Bohr atom, for k= 0 the so-called pendulum orbits
(straight lines through the nucleus); but, as was emphasized in the text
(p. 108), the latter are to be excluded.


===== PDF PAGE 0319 =====

APPENDIX XV
29I
XV. The Oscillator according to Matrix Mechanics (p. 118).
We proceed to illustrate the fundamental ideas of matrix mechanics
by means of an example, namely, the linear harmonic oscillator.
We start from the classical expression for the energy,
W = 1222
-+ f9,
which leads to the equations of motion
The difference between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics,
as was explained in the text, lies in the fact that the quantities p and
q are no longer regarded as ordinary functions of the time, but stand
for matrices, the element Inm of which denotes the quantum amplitude
associated with the transition from one energy-level En to another,
Em. Its square, just like g', the square of the amplitude in classical
mechanics, is a measure of the intensity of the line of the spectrum
emitted in this transition. When we introduce the matrices into the
classical equations of motion, we must also bring in the commutation
law
ра - др = 2ті
as quantum condition.
These equations are easily solved. If the matrix (Inm) is to satisfy
the equation of motion i † w. = 0, this equation must be satisfied
by each element of the matrix independently:
Hence if we make the natural assumption
Imm = 9(0)
we must have
(w,? - Wm) 1mm = 0;
that is, either Inm = 0 or cm = two. Thus all the quantities Imm
vanish except those for which wnm -w, Or Unm ==-Wo. As we are
still free to arrange the numbering of the matrix elements as we please,
we make the following statement: the frequency wnm = tw, corre-
sponds to the passage from the n-th state to the (n - 1)-th (emission),


===== PDF PAGE 0320 =====

=
292
APPENDIX XV
wnm = -w, to the passage from the n-th state to the (n + 1)-th
(absorption), so that
Inm = 0 if m +n+1,
9 nm → 0 if m =n‡ 1.
This choice of order will be found convenient later, as individual rows
(or columns) of the matrices with higher suffixes correspond to states
of higher energy. We would, however, expressly emphasize the fact
that this fixing of the order does not destroy the generality of the
solution in any way.
The co-ordinate matrix accordingly has the form
0
901 0 0 ...
(9 nm) =
Q10
912
0
921
0
923
•
The momentum matrix has an analogous form; from p = ug it follows
that
and hence that
W01901
0
0
...
(Prm) = ipe
W109.10
0
W12912
0
...
0
W21921
0
W23923
...
- 901
0
0
=iucoo
910
0
—912
0
0
921
0
—923
.........••
in virtue of the above statement about the quantities wrm-
What we are chiefly interested in is the question of the energy levels.
We accordingly calculate the energy matrix, using the co-ordinate
matrix and the momentum matrix just given, from the classical energy
function
W=_P
To do this we have to form the squares q? and p. This is carried out
according to the rule given in the text (p. 117) for the multiplication of
matrices. If a and b are two matrices, the elements of their product
c= ab are given by


===== PDF PAGE 0321 =====

APPENDIX XV
293
Using this rule, we readily obtain the two expressions
901910
0
901912
9° =
910901 + 912921
0
921910
0
921912 † 923932
•
901910
—901912
0
910901 + 912921
0
-921910
921912 + 923932
Substituting these matrices in the expression for the energy, we obtain
the energy matrix
901910
910901 + 912921
0
0
921912 + 923932
..
....
The first thing which strikes us about this matrix is that all the
elements vanish except those in the principal diagonal. This, however,
is equivalent in meaning to the energy theorem, namely, the energy
of a given state is constant as time goes on. Indeed, the time factors
disappear from all the diagonal terms; for example, the first term
would have the time factor prem, but this is equal to unity,
as - w01 = 10.
The individual terms of the principal diagonal represent the ener-
gies of the individual states, and in fact the element Wnn gives the
energy of the n-th state. The energy matrix involves in the first
place the elements of the not yet completely determined co-ordinate
matrix. These may, however, be obtained by means of the com-
mutation law pg- =h/2rri, and the energy levels may then be
found
If, following the above rules, we substitute the co-ordinate matrix
and the momentum matrix in the commutation law, we readily obtain
the matrix
Lo1210
• .
0
(29 - 91) =- 2iucoo
See - 910901
123932 — 921912
(E 908)


===== PDF PAGE 0322 =====

294
APPENDIX XV
This matrix must be equal to h/2mri, or, more accurately, equal to
h/2mi times the unit matrix
-1
0
0
.. •
1
0
...
0
1
The two matrices must accordingly have their terms identical; this
leads to the system of equations
901910
=
h
912921 - 901910 =
923932 - 921912=
Атро.
•
These equations can be solved in succession, giving
Qn, n+1 In +1, n= (n+ 1)
If we substitute these expressions in the energy matrix, the general
diagonal term becomes
Wnn =En= Mw, lan, n+1 In+1, n tIn, n-1 In-1, n)
_hwo (2n + 1) = hon+ 2) (n = 0, 1, 2, ...).
Here again, therefore, we obtain for our term scheme an equidistant
succession of energy levels, as in Bohr's theory. The sole difference
lies in the fact that the whole term diagram of quantum mechanics
is displaced relative to that of Bohr's theory by half a quantum of
energy. Although this difference does not manifest itself in the spec-
trum, it plays a part in statistical problems. In any case it is important.
to note that the linear harmonic oscillator possesses energy hv, in
the lowest state, the so-called zero-point energy.


===== PDF PAGE 0323 =====

APPENDIX XVI
295
XVI. The Oscillator according to Wave Mechanics (p. 124).
In this section we shall obtain the solution of the wave equation
for the linear harmonic oscillator. The equation is
BROm (E-4583)450
If we put
SamE
1=
-, a =
(<00 = 2Tr% = V(f/m))
the equation becomes
lage + 19398) 45101
Here A is the proper-value parameter and we have to find the values of
I for which the equation has a finite and unique solution throughout
all space.
We can write down one solution of the equation at once, namely,
the so-called Gaussian error function
where the proper-value parameter is 1o = a, as we readily see by sub-
stitution in the wave equation.
The corresponding energy is then
given by
h-a
E, =
8"m
This, we may state in anticipation, is the term of lowest energy, corre-
sponding to the ground state. Here, therefore, we obtain the result
given by the matrix method, namely, the ground state possesses a zero-
point energy amounting to half Planck's quantum of energy.
In order to find the remaining solutions of the wave equation, it is
convenient to assume that a is of the form
4=0-397°012).
(From the purely mathematical point of view one might be tempted
to assume a similar expression but with the plus sign in the exponent;
from the physical point of view, however, such an assumption is not
permissible, as in that case the wave function would increase beyond
all bounds as x increased.)


===== PDF PAGE 0324 =====

296
APPENDIX XVI
If we substitute the above expression in the differential equation,
a brief calculation gives the following differential equation for v:
- + (^ - a)v= 0.
As the equation is homogeneous, the factor e-bag' disappears. This
differential equation has the following advantage over the wave
equation. If we assume that u may be expressed as a power series in q,
substitute this series in the differential equation, and equate the co-
efficients of powers of q to zero, we obtain the recurrence relation
(++2)(071)0-427{1-a(2v+1)}a,=0,
involving two coefficients only; whereas if we attempt to satisfy the
wave equation by a power series for 4, we are led to a recurrence
relation involving three coefficients.
The recurrence relation just
given enables us to calculate the coefficients of the power series.
On detailed examination, however, we find that in general the power
series obtained in this way diverges more rapidly than cu
when
q → co, so that in this case the wave functions would increase
beyond all bounds at infinity. The wave functions do not converge,
i.e. the power series does not increase more slowly than etar" when
q → co, unless the power series terminates. This happens for certain
special values of the parameter 1; in fact, as we readily see from the
recurrence relation, the series breaks off at the term v = n if the factor
multiplying an vanishes, i.e. if
1= An= a(2n + 1).
Recalling the meaning of 1, in this case we obtain the expression
En = hu(n + 1)
for the energy. It is possible to give a rigorous proof that these values
for E are the only values for which the differential equation has a
solution of the required type. The actual solutions take the form of
a product of the exponential factor stated above and a finite polynomial
in q of order n; in mathematical literature these polynomials are
known as Hermite's polynomials. For our purposes it is important to
note that wave mechanics and matrix mechanics both give the same
energy levels for the harmonic oscillator, namely, a succession of equi-


===== PDF PAGE 0325 =====

APPENDIX XVII
297
distant terms, the characteristic deviation from Bohr's theory being
the displacement of the terms by thr, half the interval between them.
XVII. The Vibrations of a Circular Membrane (p. 125). •
The solution of the differential equation for the vibrations of a
circular membrane,
is easily obtained if we use polar co-ordinates. In this case, as we
know, the differential equation takes the form
1 д
1024 + 24=0.
We see that the solution may be taken as the product of a function R
depending on r only and a function @ depending on d only; i.e. in
polar co-ordinates the variables are separable.
The differential equa-
tion can then be split up into two equations with the single indepen-
dent variables r, o respectively, by means of a separation parameter,
which we shall call m?:
d-R
1 dR
i dr
+ m°Ф = 0.
The second equation gives
Ф =
(cos) (Em$).
It is essential that the wave function shall be one-valued; but this is
not the case unless m is an integer, for otherwise an increase of 2m in
the value of & would give a different value for the wave function;
hence the separation parameter m must be an integer (m ≥ 0).
The differential equation in is the well-known equation defining
the Bessel function Im(VAr) of the m-th order with argument Vr.
Here, however, we must take the boundary conditions into account.
As a particular case, we assume that the membrane is fixed at the
circumference, so that for all points on the boundary R(p) = 0, where
p is the radius of the membrane. Now the Bessel function of any order
has an infinite number of zeros (in fact if the value of the argument


===== PDF PAGE 0326 =====

298
APPENDIX XVIII
is not too small its graph is similar to a sine wave); the zeros of the
Bessel function Im(z) we shall call z0, 2, 2z,.... In order that the
boundary condition may be satisfied, the argument of the Bessel func-
tions must coincide with one of these zeros when r = p. Hence not
all values of the parameter are possible, but only those for which
In the first case the wave function has no zeros other than those for
p = p and (where m > 0) for r = 0; in the second case it has one other
zero, in the third case two other zeros; hence in general for the proper
value
there are n other zeros (circular nodal lines; see fig. 20, p. 125).
XVIII. Solution of Schrödinger's Equation for the Kepler Problem
(p. 125).
Schrödinger's equation for the Kepler problem is
A4+ -
Changing to three-dimensional polar co-ordinates r, 0, , we obtain
the equation
{22
2 2
1 22
тт"m
This equation is likewise separable; if we put
4 = R(r)®(0)Ф(ф),
the equation may be split up into the three equations
Lan 2 an + 33m (1 + 92) - 28=0.
sin 0 = 0,


===== PDF PAGE 0327 =====

APPENDIX XVIII
299
where m (as before) and 1 are the separation parameters. The solution
of the third equation we know already:
Ф=
cos |
(тф), or @ =ema,
sin
where m must be an integer, otherwise @ is not one-valued
The second equation is the equation defining the spherical harmonic
Pi" (cost), when 1 has the value 41+ 1) and im Si; for other
values the equation has no finite one-valued solution.
We shall prove
this generally by combining the f- and d-relationships in the general
surface harmonic Y,(0, ). If for brevity we introduce the notation
1
22
1 =
sin ® do sin e
sin? 0 2ф?
so that
22
2d
4 = 042
+
-+.
Y,(0, ф) must satisfy the diferential equation
17, + 17, = 0.
A general solution of this equation is obtained in the following way.
We consider a homogeneous polynomial U, of the lth degree in x, y,
z, which satisfies Laplace's equation
ДU, = 0.
If we now define a function Y, of the ratios x/r, y/r, z/r, i.e. of the
angles 0 and only, by means of the equation
substitute this in Laplace's equation AU, = 0, and carry out the dif-
ferentiation with respect to r, we obtain the equation
r ar
that is, the functions defined above are solutions of the diflerential
equation AY, + AX, = 0 in the case where
1=11+- 1).
It is possible to prove that no other values of A give finite and continu-
ons one-valued solutions of the differential equation. The proper values
of the equation
AX, + 17, =0


===== PDF PAGE 0328 =====

300
APPENDIX XVIII
are accordingly equal to lI + 1). Moreover, it is easy to reckon up
the number of arbitrary parameters in any function of the l-th degree.
The most general homogeneous polynomial of the l-th degree in x, y, z
contains 4(7 + 1)(7 + 2) arbitrary constants (it contains one term in x',
two in x'-1, three in x'-2
, and so on, and finally (l+ 1) terms not con-
taining x at all). These constants, however, are connected by certain
relations depending on the condition AU, = O; this equation is equiva-
lent to 4(1 - 1) equations for determining the coefficients, for AU,
is a homogeneous function of the (I - 2)-th degree, which must vanish
identically. Hence U, contains
+(++1)8+2)-17-11}=26+1
independent coefficients. Accordingly there are (21 + 1) linearly
independent spherical harmonics of the l-th degree. If we write them
in the usual form VIm) = Pimemd, they correspond to the (21 + 1)
possible values of the third (magnetic) quantum number m.
We now pass on to the differential equation for the radial function R:
Its solution must be finite and continuous for all values of r from zero
to infinity. Here we are chiefly interested in the magnitude of the
proper values E for which this equation has a solution satisfying the
prescribed conditions. In particular, we shall only discuss the case
where E < 0. This corresponds to the elliptical orbits in Bohr's theory;
energy must be supplied in order to remove the electron to the boundary
of the atom or, better expressed, to an infinite distance from the nucleus.
The case where E > 0 would correspond to Bohr's hyperbolic orbits.
For the sake of simplicity we shall introduce rational units. We
shall measure the radius in multiples of the Bohr radius
and the energy in multiples of the ground stats of the Bohr atom,
- 2m me 2
—, i.e. we put (p. 99)
The wave equation then takes the simpler form
2 d
R = 0.


===== PDF PAGE 0329 =====

APPENDIX XVIII
30I
We begin by investigating the behaviour of the function R for very
large values of p. We accordingly omit the terms in 1/p and 1/p2 in
the differential equation, so that the behaviour at infinity is given by
the equation
(apt s) Po = O. Its solution is Ra = eters; the upper
sign, however, is impossible, as then the wave function would increase
exponentially beyond all bounds as r and p increased and therefore
could not be regarded as a proper function.
The second special region is that of the origin. We obtain an
approximation by omitting terms of the differential equation which
tend to infinity more slowly than 1/p when p → 0. The equation is
then
2 d
_4+ 1))
Ro =0.
p dp
Here the solutions are R, = p' and Ro = p-'-]; the second of these
is impossible, for it becomes infinite at the origin.
We now know how the desired function behaves at the two singu-
larities p = 0 and p= 00. It is natural to assume that the complete
function R is of the form
where fis a function of p which must of course behave regularly at
these two points (i.e. must not increase more rapidly than eteve at
infinity) and which determines the nature of the complete function in
the region intermediate between the regions of validity of the power,
p', and of the exponential function. Substituting this expression
in the differential equation, we readily obtain the following differential
equation for f:
def
+ 212 + 1) af
- 2V €
dp'"
We attempt to solve it by means of a power series in p (or, better, in
2pV/e) and accordingly write
Substituting this in the differential equation and rearranging the terms
somewhat, we obtain
V)=.


===== PDF PAGE 0330 =====

302
APPENDIX XIX
This series must vanish identically, so that we obtain the recurrence
relation
a,+14+1)(0+27+2) =0,
for the coefficients. At the origin the function f is of course finite and
equal to the initial term ao. At infinity, on the other hand, f becomes
infinite, and in fact, as more detailed analysis shows, to a higher order
than eteve, provided the series for f does not terminate. If, however,
the series does terminate, R vanishes at infinity, despite the fact
that f becomes infinite, in virtue of the exponential factor e-ve. The
condition that the series shall terminate is obtained from the recurrence
relation; the series breaks of after the n,-th term if
no +1+1=
1
VE
That is, 1/Ve must be a positive integer, or
1
€ =-
n?'
where n =n, + l + 1; n is known as the principal quantum number,
n, as the radial quantum number.
We see, therefore, that solutions of the differential equation which
satisfy the conditions of finiteness, continuity, and one-valuedness can
be found only for certain discrete values of the parameter e, namely
the values € = 1/n. Hence certain definite energy levels are alone
possible, namely
27?me*Z}
hR,Z?
_=__
n?,
which are those introduced in Bohr's theory to explain spectra.
We may add that the polynomials f are known as Laguerre's poly-
nomials; these, however, we shall not discuss in more detail here,
except to mention that their zeros determine the position of the nodal
surfaces r = const.; in fact, R has n, nodes, not counting the zeros for
r = O (in the case where l > 0) and r = co.
XIX. The Resultant Angular Momentum (p. 129).
In the text we gave the operators
.. ... •


===== PDF PAGE 0331 =====

APPENDIX XIX
303
corresponding to the components of the angular momentum.
The
square of the resultant angular momentum is
where the expression Mx implies the repetition of the operator Mx;
that is, if we have operated with M. on a function i, the application
of M, to the function & means the formation of M (I 4).
For the first component, for example, we accordingly have
M34-(27) 06-0005-340
or, carrying out the differentiations,
đ + 0):
hence the operator Mx is identical with the operator
(2) (-328
-2?
+z
Adding the three components, we have
i (3 1-(0+38) 28 +168723 + 80-79 89)
+ đ + v a
• 27).
or, rearranging the terms and noting that
Ox die da
Oxi
M3 = 2)
—-=.
х д
As we know,
+
r дх
r 0z
-ay? so thit


===== PDF PAGE 0332 =====

304
APPENDIX XX
If we now change to polar co-ordinates, we see (cf. Appendix XVIII,
p. 298) that
h2
This simply means that for every state with azimuthal quantum
number I, M? has the proper value.
1П2"
4l + 1). The magnitude of the
resultant angular momentum is accordingly quantised and has the
value Im
•VIl + 1).
Further, in polar co-ordinates with polar axis & we have
h д
MA =
Applying this operator to the one-valued function eima (where m = 0,
1, 2, &c.), we have
Memo = 1 metes;
that is, the component M, of the angular momentum is also quantised,
its proper values being integral multiples of h/2m, Bohr's unit of
angular momentum.
We cannot go into the behaviour of the other
two components (M. M,) here, but merely mention that the matrices
corresponding to them can be evaluated by the method explained in
Appendix XXI.
XX. Deduction of Rutherford's Scattering Formula by Wave Me
chanics (p. 131).
We consider Schrödinger's differential equation
h al
8n?m
4=0,
and with it the conjugate imaginary form
8n?m
4* = 0.


===== PDF PAGE 0333 =====

APPENDIX XX
305
If we multiply the first equation by f*, the second by 4, and subtract,
we obtain
-
→(4A4-4AV)+
+ 4 0) =0,
872m
or
• (236) =
hi 2 1 04
4тт (дх
Thus, defining the stream vector s (number of particles per square
centimetre per second) by the components
Sx =
83 =
.,S2=...,
we have
2141
=-divs;
hence
du 114120=- fdivsdo = - fando.
Since the last integral represents the total number of particles
leaving the bounding surface per second, this relation is consistent
with the assumption that
AZ
f141=20
represents the number of particles
within the volume v. If 4, and there-
fore s, vanishes at the boundary (for
ПОд
example, at infinity), then
n
(|4/do = const.,
i.e. the total number of particles re-
mains constant.
For a stationary process (i~
e-(milhEl), in which
particles
with
Fig. 5.—Diagram for Rutherford's
large energy come from infinity, we
scattering formula
have approximately, as in the text,
(en A + 3) - Vetel
or
44 + 192 = F(x, 4, 2) 1102,


===== PDF PAGE 0334 =====

306
APPENDIX XX
where
* =
• V(2mE), F =-
V.
Ti
722
The general solution, which corresponds to superposition of the incident
wave eice with an outgoing spherical wave, is
i =0112-
where R is the distance between P(x, Y, z) and P'(x, Y, z).
It is sufficient to have the solution for very great distances
r= V(x+y+22) from the nucleus K (fig. 5); we have then
approximately
R=r-r'n,
where r' is the vector KP', and n is the unit vector in the direction
KP. We can also put
' =r'no,
where n is the unit vector in the z-direction. Hence
On introducing polar co-ordinates a, & round the vector no -n as
axis, we find
eiter
+ =e262-
, 1(8);
here
f(0) =
with
=kV/2(1 - 723) = 7V/2(1-0050) = 2k sin
where t is the angle between n, i.e. KP, and the z-axis. The integra-
tions with respect to a and & can be carried out:
f(0) =
am I reversar sinki


===== PDF PAGE 0335 =====

APPENDIX XX
The intensity of the incident wave is
1 (*)
that of the scattered wave (for r great) is found from the secondary
wave:
Sp =
=Ini
p2
m,
Hence the scattering probability per unit solid angle is
20=43 50=47(0)33
The potential can be represented approximately by
r = Relena
where the exponential function represents the screening effect of the
bound electrons; a is of the order of magnitude of atomic radii, 10-8 cm.
The r-integration can then also be effected, and we get
8T7m
ZeE
f(0) =
Now K = 2k sin
4 тт
- sin
where d is the de Broglie wave-length;
2
hence 1/a? is always small compared with K for particles with veloci-
ties at all rapid
, except for the immediate neighbourhood of the direc-
tion of the primary beam (A ~0). If 1/a is neglected, the effect of
the screening disappears entirely, and we find
872m ZeE
f(0) =
=
h°
he sin* 0/2'
or, with
(u = velocity):
ZeE
1
f(0) =
2mv sin?0js
On squaring,
this gives exactly Rutherford's scattering formula,


===== PDF PAGE 0336 =====

308
APPENDIX XXI
p. 53 (apart from the notation: m instead of M, 0 instead of @).
Whatever the law for V(r) may be, a closed formula can be obtained
(Bethe) just as easily as in the case before us, this law being expressed
by an integral taken over the appropriate screening charge density,
the so-called atomic scattering factor.
XXI. Deduction of the Selection Rules for the Kepler Problem (p. 133).
As was shown in § 6 (p. 130), the radiation associated with a
quantum jump is given essentially by the matrix element of the
co-ordinate, which is related to the wave-mechanical mean value of the
electrical dipole moment in the way indicated in the text:
and so on. Here we shall prove that a large number of these
integrals vanish, and that it is only for certain combinations of the
quantum numbers (l, m) and (l', m') satisfying the " selection rules"
that non-zero values are obtained for these integrals.
To do this we must investigate the proper functions for the various
states.
We deduced these in Appendix XVIII (p. 298), and showed
that they may be written in the form
{n, 2 = Run, 2(9) 72(0, ф),
where Rn, (r) is a function of the radius only and Y,(0, p) denotes a
general surface harmonic satisfying the differential equation
+81748+11815061=8
sin o
+=
sin • đo
sin? 0 đф2)
We recall that the functions I, are obtained by removing the factor
' from a homogeneous polynomial of the l-th degree, U (x, Y, z), which
satisfies Laplace's equation AU, = 0. If we introduce this form of the
wave functions into the matris element above, the integral is split
up into two parts, an integral over the elementary solid angle
dw = sinaded, which is of the form
and therefore does not depend on r, and the radial integral
(for dxdydz = pardw). Here we shall consider the first integral only,
as it gives the selection rules by itself, the second integral merely


===== PDF PAGE 0337 =====

APPENDIX XXI
309
determining the gradations in the intensity of the radiation for the
various transitions.
We now assert that J''" is always zero unless the selection rule
Y' =1I 1 is satisfied. To prove this some preliminaries are required.
In the first place, it is easy to see that the integral
is zero except when l= l'. For the differential equation
when 1 is written out in full becomes
sin • a0
if we now multiply both sides by du = sinOdedd and integrate over
the whole range of 0 and , the left-hand side vanishes, the first term
on account of the vanishing of sinO at the limits, the second term on
account of its periodicity in . Hence the integral of the right-hand
side must vanish also, and the fact that
leads to the result stated above, since the factor l'(l' + 1) - (2 + 1)
is not zero unless l' == ¿ (land l' are not less than zero); if l' +6, there-
fore, the integral must vanish.
The proof of the selection rules is now completed as follows: as
we shall show immediately, an expression of the form " Y, may always
be represented as the sum of two general surface harmonics of orders
(1 + 1) and (l- 1), that is,
1, =71+1+72-1
If we substitute this in the integral Jy"), it follows from the relation just
proved that the integral vanishes identically except when l =1 + 1.
The proof of the relation just used follows from the theorem that
every homogeneous polynomial F(x, y, z) of the n-th degree can be
reduced in one way only to an expression of the form
(E 908)


===== PDF PAGE 0338 =====

3I0
APPENDIX XXI
where the functions Un are the potential functions introduced above.
If n= 0 or 1 the theorem is trivial, as every polynomial of zero or
first degree is already a potential function. We shall prove by induc-
tion that it is true in general. If we assume that the theorem is true
for all polynomials of degree less than n, it is certain that AF, which
is a polynomial of the (n - 2)-th degree, can be written in the form
AH = U.
n-2+pUn-4t.+122-2077-2nt...,
where the functions Un are potential functions different from the
Un's.
We assert that the general solution of this equation, subject
to the condition that E is of degree n, is
F' =G+
-+.
2(2n - 1)
4(2n - 3)
2h(2n - 2h + 1)
...
where G is an arbitrary function of the n-th degree, which satisfies
Laplace's equation AG = 0; for if we pick out an arbitrary term of
this series and make use of Euler's theorem for homogeneous poly-
nomials, we have
A(22h(J%
7-2n) = ph AU%-an+ 2 graduan grad U*-2 + (4,2) *- 2h
which gives the result stated. The polynomial E is therefore reduced
to the required form if we put U*
n- 2h = 2h2n - 2h+ 1) n-2h and
Un = G.
The proof of the relation stated follows at once: xU, is a polyno-
mial of the (l+ 1)-th degree and may therefore be expressed in the
form given above: as A(xU,) = > 0U is itself a potential function
(tor A a - a of of degree 1-1, only the first term of the
series, namely U,-1, appears in it, so that xU, involves only the first
two terms of the series: hence
xU,=+77171372-13
or, using the functions Y, and dividing the equation by pt,
as we asserted above.


===== PDF PAGE 0339 =====

APPENDIX XXI
3II
Now that we have given a general proof of the validity of the selec-
tion rule l' = 1 + 1 for the azimuthal quantum number, we shall go
on to consider the case where the levels with differing magnetic quantum
numbers are split up, e.g. by an external magnetic field, and seek to find
the selection rules which apply to transitions between these various
levels.
For this purpose we change to the usual notation for the wave
functions, in which the magnitude of the angular momentum about a
particular axis may be recognized directly, viz. the general surface
harmonic Y,(0, ф) is replaced by the special function Pieimp; then
the angular momentum about the polar axis is equal to mh 2m. The
integral Jimm' then splits up into two integrals involving 0 alone and
d alone; here we are interested only in the integral in p, the integral
in t merely giving the selection rule just obtained for l.
We accordingly have to consider the three integrals
"ЯТІ
.2т
• 2т
which are readily evaluated if we introduce polar co-ordinates instead
of x, y, and z. Since z= r cos cos0, the third integral is zero except when
m'= m. We combine the two others in the following way:
This gives the selection rule m' == m + 1.
What, then, is the meaning of these two different selection rules
in the case of the matrix elements i, I, & for the emitted radiation?
We saw above that apart from the factor e (the elementary charge)
this matrix element means the wave-mechanical average (probability)
of the electrical dipole moment for a transition from the state nim to
the state n'l'm'. According to the correspondence principle, however,
the existence of a dipole moment variable in time implies the emission
of electromagnetic radiation; also, the radiation field of an oscil-
lating dipole exhibits the peculiarity that there is no emission in


===== PDF PAGE 0340 =====

312
APPENDIX XXII
the direction of its vibration. If, therefore, the selection rule m'= m.
holds only for the z-component of the dipole moment, this means that
the radiation corresponding to the transition m →m only appears
when the electrical charge-cloud vibrates in the special direction (the
z-direction). Hence this radiation can only be observed obliquely
(at right angles) to the special direction. It is otherwise in the case
of the two transitions m → m ≤ 1, which can be observed in all direc-
tions. By making observations in the x-direction, for example, we see
the radiation due to the vibration of the dipole in the y-direction,
which in fact is the direction of vibration of the electric vector of the
radiation. If we make observations in the z-direction, we still observe
the x- and y-components of the radiation, but they are circularly
polarized; as we see at once from the discussion above, the transition
m →m + 1 corresponds to a vibration of the charge-cloud with
dipole moment x + iy, i.e. a circular vibration in the positive direction
about the z-axis; similarly for the transition m → m - 1.
These theoretical statements can be tested directly in the case of
the normal Zeeman effect. As is well known, on transverse observation
(at right angles to the magnetic field) we see the normal Lorentz triplet,
i.e. a splitting-up into three components. Of these the central one,
which corresponds to the transition m → m and is therefore not dis-
placed, is polarized in the direction of the magnetic field, while the
two other components, corresponding to the transitions m →m ≤ 1
are transversally polarized. In longitudinal observations the undis-
placed component disappears and we see only the two displaced
components, which, as theory requires, are circularly polarized.
XXII. The Formalism of Quantum Mechanics, and the Uncertainty
Relation (pp. 84, 135).
The deduction of the uncertainty relation, with the help of difirac-
tion phenomena and other processes capable of being visualized, gives
only a result specifying an order of magnitude. To obtain an exact
inequality, we must call upon the formalism of quantum mechanics.
Of this a short exposition will now be given, and the various theorems
will be illustrated by examples in the preceding Appendices.
In wave mechanics, there corresponds to every physical magni-
tude a (linear) operator A, which acts upon a wave function & of the
co-ordinates q (q for brevity representing 91, l2.. ), and transforms
it into another function (g):


===== PDF PAGE 0341 =====

APPENDIX XXII
313
To the co-ordinate q itself, considered as an operator, corresponds the
operation " multiplication by b b= qy; to the momentum p corre-
h
sponds the operator
, so that d=
Generally, we may
Еті ба
2ті до
think of A as any function of q and p; e.g. p2 + 9', which changes y
into the function
6 =(102 +93)4=
+ 92.4.
Two operations A, B are in general not commutative, AB # BA;
e.g. p9 - 98 = h/2ni. If an operator A reproduces a function y except
for a tactor, Ay = ay, then & is called a proper function of A, and a
a proper value of A. An example is given by the equation py = ar,
Or
=a, with the solution d=eilhas, which shows that
2ті дд
the proper functions in general are complex numbers. The proper
value a is here any number. The operator p itself is usually called real,
if the proper values a are taken as real numbers; the operator q is of
course also real. Generally, the following definition is found useful:
to every operator A there corresponds an adjoint A+ defined by the
condition that for any two functions , & we are to have
If A = At, A is said to be real. That is the case, for example, for
g and p. With q, this is trivial; with p, we have, by integration by
parts,
=S. (204) 09=54-(a) 00,
where we assume that the integrated terms vanish.
Gencrally, the
proper values of real operators are real; for it follows from A = A+,.
for p = i, that the magnitude
and is therefore real. If further Ay= al, then, except for the real
factor fe*da, the preceding magnitude is equal to a.


===== PDF PAGE 0342 =====

314
APPENDIX XXII
''Let A be a real operator, and a, ay two of its proper values, 41, 42
the corresponding proper functions, so that we have
A41=0141, A42=02420
Multiply the first equation by d*, the conjugate of the second by ti;
then integrate over the q-space and subtract: thus
The left side vanishes, since A = At. Hence, for any two unequal
proper values (a1 = 02),
the proper functions are said to be orthogonal.
Any proper function can be multiplied by an arbitrary factor; this
we determine by the normalizing condition
/ 4141* dg =/|411=dg=1;
thus, for any two proper values am, An (assumed to be unequal)
where Emn is equal to 1 or 0, according as m =n, or m +n. Examples
have already been given (oscillator, p. 295; hydrogen atom, p. 298).
A real operator has in general an infinite number of proper values
a1, 0z,..., and proper functions 41, 42.... The former we here
assume for simplicity to be discrete and all different. We can develop
any laction in a series ot such proper functions (gonoralized fourier
n
On multiplication by In* this gives, in virtue of the orthogonal and
normalizing relations:
Further, we have
12
We can take for d the function Bim where im is one of the proper


===== PDF PAGE 0343 =====

APPENDIX XXII
315
functions of the operator A, and B another operator; the coefficients
(Gri) depend now on both indices m and n:
Brm = / 4n*(Bem)dg.
These Bm can be considered as the elements of a matrix, representing
the operator B in the system of the proper functions 41, 42 ... of the
operator A; for it can easily be shown that the Bm have the properties
of matrix coefficients. From the definition of the adjoint operator
it follows that
interchanging n and m and taking the conjugate we get
This shows that to find the matrix element of the adjoint B+ one has
to interchange lines and columns (m n) and to replace each element
by the conjugate value.
We consider now the matrix clement of the composite operator
BC:
using the definition of the adjoint operator B+ we get
Here we substitute the developments
and find
This formula shows that the matrix clement of the operator product
BO is equal to the element of the matrix product of the matrices be-
longing to B and C. In other words: The operator calculus (or wave
mechanics) and the matrix caleulus are equivalent representations of
quantum theory.


===== PDF PAGE 0344 =====

316
APPENDIX XXII
The statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics consists in the
following assumptions: To each physical quantity or "observable"
belongs a real operator A. The proper functions 41, 42, ... correspond
to the quantised states, for which the operator takes the value a or
dz OT Ag.::; any function d is a state, which is composed of these
states, or it may be a distribution of several systems over the states
01, 02, ...
The coefficients cn of the expansion determine the strength with
which the quantum state n occurs in the general state d. The proba-
bility of then finding the proper value a, in a measurement is given by
If we assume that /|@/=dg = 1, we have
The mean value of the quantity represented by A in the state & is:
The mean value of the product AA+ is never negative; for, by the
definition of A+,
AA+ = /ф* (AA+Ф)dg=/¢*. A(4+4)dg
We can now deduce inequalities referring to the mean values of two
real operators A, B-inequalities which lead to Heisenberg's uncertainty
relation.
From the definition of At, it follows on multiplication by i that
that is to say, (iA) + = - iA+. Somewhat more generally, we have also
(A + iB)+= At - iBt.
If A, B are real, and 1 is a real number, then
(A + iXB)(A + iNB)+ ≥ 0,
or
(1 + iNB)(A — iNB) = A + BEX- i(AB - BA)A ≥0.


===== PDF PAGE 0345 =====

APPENDIX XXII
3IT
From this it follows that AB-BA is purely imaginary.
The
minimum of the last expression occurs when
i AB - BA
B2
and is equal to
(AB - BA)?
42 + 4
= 0.
B?
Hence
A2. B? ≥ — 4(AB - BA)?.
Now replace A and B by SA = A - A and SB = B - B; then
SASB - SB&A = AB - AB - ÀB + AB
- BA + BA + BA - BA
= AB - BA,
and the preceding equation gives
(SA)ª. (SB) ≥ - —4(AB — BA)?.
If p and q are conjugate operators (momentum and co-ordinate), we
have
therefore
For the root-mean-square deviations
Ap = V ((Sp)ª), Ag = V ((8g)3)
we therefore have
h
4 тг
The sign of equality holds only for one definite distribution (proper
function), viz. the Gaussian error function, which occurs in the case of
the linear oscillator (see Appendix XII, p. 282; Appendix XVI, p. 295;
and Appendix XXXII, p. 343).


===== PDF PAGE 0346 =====

318
APPENDIX XXIII
XXIII. Anomalous Zeeman Effect in the D Lines of Sodium (p. 146).
We shall now deduce the splitting pattern of the D lines of sodium
in the anomalous Zeeman effect. As we stated at p. 139, the D1
line corresponds to the transition from a p term with inner quantum
number 2, i.e. from (l = 1, j= 2), to an s term, i.e. to (1 = 0, j = 2);
the D, line represents a transition from (1 = 1, j = 2) to (1 = 0, j = ½).
We begin by determining Landé's splitting factors for the three
terms in question. We have s = ½; the formula
8(8+1) - 17+1)
Z(i+1)
then gives the following results:
1=0, j=: 9=3+
= 2;
1=
- = 3;
1=1, 1,j=79=+2x3-1x2
==.
In the two following diagrams we collect the values of the separations
of the terms, taking the separation for the normal Zeeman effect as
unit. That is, we write down the values mg for the upper and lower
terms of the two lines. The values of m, like j, must be halves of odd
numbers, as they are equal to -j, -it 1, ...,j.
m =
m=
1=1
1 = 1
j=3
-2
-}
+3
2
1 = 0
=1
+1
1 = 0
- 1
+1
The arrows indicate the possible transitions, i.e. give the positions
of the lines in the Zeeman effect. Here the selection rules for the
magnetic quantum number m must be taken into account. These can
be deduced from the correspondence principle in exactly the same way
as at p. 110 (see also Appendix XXI, (p. 308)). As m denotes the
precessional motion about the direction of the field, the transition
Am = 1 corresponds to the classical vibrations at right angles to H;


===== PDF PAGE 0347 =====

APPENDIX XXIV
3I9
these components of the radiation are called o components. When
observed in the longitudinal direction (in the direction of the field),
they appear circularly polarized (as predicted by the classical theory);
when observed in the transverse direction, they appear linearly polarized
at right angles to the field. Further, the transitions Am = 0 are also
permissible; they correspond to the classical vibrations in the direc-
tion of the field. These, known as a components, are visible as vibra-
tions parallel to the field, on transverse observation only (in the
direction of vibration of a dipole, i.e. in the direction of the magnetic
field in the present case, the radiation is zero).
These selection rules at once determine the positions of the com-
ponents in the Zeeman splitting of the D
lines. We measure their displacements
+3
on either side from a central zero posi-
tion, as before taking the separation in
the normal Zeeman eflect, i.e. v, in the
frequency scale, as unit. The n com-
ponents are shown above the horizontal
9+3
+*
axis and the o components below. We
Da
thus obtain the splitting diagram of fig. 6,
g. Do splitting of the sodium D lines in the anomalo
Zeeman effect.
le splitting (r) in the normal effect
shown as unity.
The (r-) components polarized parallel
to the field are shown above; the (o-) components polarized
11-15
perpendicular to the field, below.
-1
+ 1
+ 5
which is found to be in complete agreement with that obtained ex-
perimentally (see fig. 2b, Plate VII).
XXIV. Enumeration of the Terms in the case of two p-Electrons
(p. 160).
Here we consider an example of the enumeration of the terms of
an atom in the case of two valency electrons (Hund); a knowledge
of the number of terms is of great importance in connexion with the
analysis of the corresponding spectrum and is also required in problems
of a statistical nature.
For example, we suppose that the values
of the terms are de-
termined by two p-electrons and inquire what the number of terms
is. Here we must consider whether these two electrons are equivalent
or not, i.e. whether their principal quantum numbers are the same or
not; we have of course assumed that their azimuthal quantum numbers
are both equal to 1.


===== PDF PAGE 0348 =====

320
APPENDIX XXIV
We shall take the second, case first as it is the simpler; here we
do not need to trouble about the exclusion principle, seeing that the
principal quantum numbers are different. According to the rules for
combining angular momenta in the quantum theory, the resultant
orbital momentum l may have the three values 0, 1, 2 (4 and l may be
parallel (l=2) or anti-parallel (l= 0) or may be inclined to one
another at an angle such that their vector sum is 1). Combination of
the two spin moments gives resultant spin 1 for the parallel position,
resultant spin O for the anti-parallel position. Hence both a triplet
system and a singlet system occur.
Moreover, owing to the three
possibilities for l there are S, P, and D terms. The following terms
accordingly appear:
1,S, 1P, 1D; 8S, 3P, 3D.
As the 3S term is single (see the discussion in the text (pp. 139 and
158)), in this case there are ten different terms in all.
If an external field is applied, however, this number is considerably
increased owing to the various settings of the resultant angular
momentum relative to the special direction; a term with resultant
angular momentum j has 2j + 1 possible settings in the field. We
thus obtain the following scheme:
Term
j
2j+ 1
1,8
0
0
1
1P1
1
0
1
1D2
2
2
0
1
1
0
3P1
1
1
3
1
2
5
3 DI
2
1
1
3 Da
2
1
2
5
3D3
2
1
3
7
---
Total .. 36
In an external field there are accordingly 36 different energy levels
• in all, for the case of two non-equivalent p-electrons.
The enumeration becomes more complicated in the case where the
electrons are equivalent, as here the exclusion principle must be taken
into account. Hence it is necessary to write down the complete system
of eight quantum numbers and strike out all the cases where all the
quantum numbers of the two electrons are the same. In the first
instance, therefore, we imagine the directional degeneracy removed


===== PDF PAGE 0349 =====

APPENDIX XXIV
32I
by an external field, so that there is a meaning in stating the com-
ponents of the angular momenta in the special direction. As quantum
numbers we shall in addition to ny =Ng and 11 = 12 = 1 use My, Ma,
the projections of the orbital momenta, and of, oz, the projections of
the spin momenta, along the special direction.
In the following table we have collected all the possible combina-
tions for these four quantum numbers, omitting all those combinations
which would contradict the exclusion principle. Further, we have not
written down those combinations which arise from a given set merely
by interchanging the quantum numbers of the two electrons; for
since we cannot distinguish one electron from the other these of course
are identical and are associated with the same energy term.
Hence
we have the following table:
2
+*
1
1, 0, 0, -1
-1
1, 0, 0, -1
0
-1
1, 0, 0, -1
-1
-1
-2
In the fifth and sixth columns we have inserted the sums y = My + Mr.
and o= o1 + 02. We sec, thercfore, that in the magnetic field there
are only 15 terms in all (magnetic splitting), while, as we saw above,
in the case of non-equivalent electrons there are 36 terms in all in the
magnetic field.
We are, however, not so much interested in the splitting of the terms
in the magnetic field as in values for the undisturbed atom. We must
therefore combine into one term of the undisturbed atom those terms
in the magnetic field which have the same inner quantum number
jand the same orbital angular momentum l; for we know from the
above that one term with inner quantum number j is split up in a
magnetic field into 2j+ 1 terms. Now from the above table we see
that there must be at least one term with orbital angular momentum
b=2 (a D term), as there are components of this momentum with
values 2 and -2 in the specified direction. We see at the same time
that the corresponding spin quantum number s must vanish, as in
these terms the spin component o = O alone appears; we accordingly
have a 'D term with inner quantum number j= +* = 2, which


===== PDF PAGE 0350 =====

322
APPENDIX XXV
must split up into five terms in the magnetic field, terms for which
• = 0 and u = -2, -1,..., +2. Of the remaining ten terms, we
may likewise readily convince ourselves that nine correspond to
I terms (l= 1) with spin quantum numbers o = — 1, 0, 1, while the last.
term is an IS term. We accordingly have the following arrangement:
Multiplet
Term Notation
14=1-2, -1, 0, 1, 2 corresponds to ? = 2) "D
five terms in the absence of a magnetic field, as compared with ten
terms in the case of non-equivalent electrons. The terms 3S, IP, and 3D
found above fall out here (owing to the exclusion principle).
An analogous enumeration for the case of a greater number of
equivalent p-electrons is given in the following table. As regards the
Number of p Electrons
Terms
6
1,8
1 or 5
2 or 4
1,S, 3P, ID
3
4,S, 2P, =D
energies of the terms, a quantum-mechanical estimation agrees with
experiment in giving the result that the term with the greatest multi-
plicity, ie. with the greatest value of s, is always the lowest; that is,
if there are two or four p-electrons the ground state is a 3P term, while
if there are three p-electrons it is a 4S term. If there are several terms.
of the same multiplicity, that with the greatest value of l is the lowest.
XXV. Temperature Variation of Paramagnetism (p. 166).
In order to understand the variation of paramagnetism with tem-
perature we shall consider a simplified model of a paramagnetic sub-
stance. We think of the substance as consisting of a large number of
particles, all of which have the same magnetic moment M. We shall
also in the first instance ignore azimuthal quantisation, i.e. we assume
that this moment can be inclined at any angle l to the direction of the
field, and not merely at certain specified angles.


===== PDF PAGE 0351 =====

APPENDIX XXV
323
So long as a particle is moving undisturbed in the magnetic field,
the magnetic moment, which is always associated with an angular
momentum about the same axis (cf. the top), will execute a preces-
sional motion about the direction of the field, the angle at which it is
inclined to the field remaining constant.
The magnetic energy for this
orientation is given by
I = - MH cos 0.
As a result of interaction with the other particles (collisions), however,
this state of equilibrium is disturbed, the angle of inclination after
collision being different from that before collision. From the kinetic
theory we already know that the collisions due to thermal motions
have the eflect that in course of time the particles become uniformly
distributed among all possible states (here possible angles of inclination
to the field). The magnetic field, however, acts against this equaliza-
tion; accordingly, settings of the moment in its direction are favoured
as regards energy compared with those in the opposite direction. A
state of equilibrium will be established, which can be determined by
statistical methods.
In our discussion of the kinetic theory of gases we have already
shown that a statistical argument gives Boltzmann's distribution law
for the probability of a definite energy state, according to which a
definite state with energy E has the probability
The form in which the temperature I appears in this expression is
deduced from thermodynamical considerations; k is Boltzmann's
constant. In our case, therefore, the probability that the magnetic
moment will set itself at a definite angle @ to the direction of the
field is given by
(B = MH/kT).
We now investigate the mean magnetic moment in the direction of the
field. If the field were equal to zero or if the thermal motion (in the case
of very high temperatures) greatly preponderated over the directional
effect of the magnetic field, so that the distribution of directions bo-
came almost uniform, the mean magnetic moment in a specified
direction, in the direction of the field in particular, would be approxi-
mately or accurately equal to zero. At low temperatures, or with
magnetic fields so strong that the magnetic energy ME is of the same
order as the thermal energy kT, there will be a marked preference for


===== PDF PAGE 0352 =====

APPENDIX XXV
324
the direction of the field, giving rise to a finite mean magnetic moment
in this direction. If we adopt the classical ideas, according to which
all directions of the moment are equally possible, the calculation is
easily carried out. By definition
M cos 0 = M
5' a 000 sin odo
Evaluating the integrals, we obtain
đ, 10g
=Mete-s
= 11 coth, B -
In the limiting case B < 1, ie. for weak fields or high temporutures,
we obtain the expression
M-H
M cos 0 = M(zB+...) = 3kI
by expanding in powers of B.
In this limiting case, however, we could have obtained the result
more easily by introducing a power series in p into the formula defining
M cos 0. We then have
IM cos 0 = IMI
The first term in the numerator vanishes on integration, while the
second gives 2p/3. Even the first term in the denominator differs
from zero, its value being 2. The quotient gives the expression stated
above.
Now it is important to know that the same formula results from
calculations on the basis of the quantum theory, ie. if we take into
account only a finite number of positions of the moment. We assume
that f has small values and the resultant angular momentum large


===== PDF PAGE 0353 =====

APPENDIX XXV
325
values. The fact that in this case we obtain the classical result for
M cos® is understandable if we consider the correspondence principle
(the limiting case of large quantum numbers). It is perhaps advisable,
however, for the reader to convince himself that this statement is
correct by direct evaluation of the sums. If the resultant angular
momentum is j, there are 2j + 1 possible settings of the moment
relative to the direction of the field; in fact, the projection of j on
this can have the values -j, -j+1,..., +j. In the previous
calculation we therefore have merely to replace
• cose by m/j and
replace the integrals by sums:
Leßmli
-j
Expanding in powers of & and making use of the formula
n(n+ 1) (2n+ 1)
6
we have
Em (1+
1(j+ 1) (2j+ 1)
= MB -
M Cos 8 = M =2
2j+1
MB 1+1
MB
or, for large values of j, l cos® =
3, its we previously obtained by
classical methods.
The susceptibility x is defined as the magnetic moment of the
substance in question per unit field intensity it; per mole
LM?_ (LM)*
x = 3kT
-=
3RT
This is known as Curie's law; the magnetic susceptibility is inversely
proportional to the temperature, ie. decreases with increasing tem-
perature.
We conclude with a fow brief remarks on the simplifications made
above. The account which we have just given certainly suffices for a
rough survey of the variation of paramagnetism with temperature;
(E 908)
22


===== PDF PAGE 0354 =====

326
APPENDIX XXVI
but if, in particular, we wish to draw conclusions about the magnitude
of the atomic magnetic moments from the measured values of the
susceptibility, more detailed arguments become necessary. In the
first place, as we have already indicated, the existence of azimuthal
quantisation must be taken into account; this has the effect of intro-.
ducing the factor (j+ I)/j into the expression given above for the
mean magnetic moment in the direction of the field. Further, we must
take account of the fact that in general all the atoms of a substance do
not have the same magnetic moment. When discussing the anomalous
Zeeman effect we saw that the resultant magnetic moment of an atom
is equal to the Bohr magneton multiplied by the resultant angular
momentum j and the so-called Landé factor g, which depends on the
three quantum numbers j, s, and l. One would therefore have to take
the average for all possible combinations of the quantum numbers.
In this connexion we add the following remark. Weiss imagined
that his measurements of the susceptibilities of various substances
necessitated the conclusion that an elementary magnetic moment or
"magneton" does exist, of which the magnetic moments of the
various substances are integral multiples; the Weiss magneton is
eh
about one-fifth of the Bohr magneton
- whose existence follows
Атис
from the theory. This was due to his application to the experimental
results of a formula which had been deduced without reference to the
quantum theory. Discussion of more recent results in the light of the
quantum theory has established the Bohr magneton as an elementary
unit.
XXVI. Theory of Nuclear Disintegration (p. 182).
Let the potential for an a-particle, which has been emitted from a
nucleus of atomic number Z and is therefore in the field of the residual
nucleus Z - 2, be V(r). For great distances this is the Coulomb
potential, i.e.
1(1) =212 - 2)e, for n> rai
ro:
foIr <% the form V(r) is unknown, but special assumptions about it
are unnecessary, apart from this, that it must have the crater-like
character represented in fig. 18, p. 182.
According to Laue, the frequency & of the emission can be split
up into two factors.
We think of the a-particle as oscillating to and
tro in the crater, so that it strikes the wall n times per second. At


===== PDF PAGE 0355 =====

APPENDIX XXVI
327
each collision there is a certain probability p that it passes the wall.
Hence
1 =np.
The order of magnitude of n we can take to be v/2ro, where v is the
velocity of the a-particle; the latter in its turn can be determined by
putting the wave-length k/mu of the associated de Broglie wave equal
to 2rg.
We thus find
n =.
4mr 2'
To calculate p, we have to find a suitable solution of Schrödinger's
equation
+(E -V("))4s= 0.
For r <ro, the function i will oscillate in some way or other; for
large values of r it will be a progressive wave.
If the energy of the
a-particle is E, the latter state will be attained at about the distance
where
E
In the intermediate zone from i, to i, & will fall off exponentially.
Thus, clearly we have approximately
(401) 13
14680)1
But Coulomb's law still holds in this intermediate zone; we have
therefore to solve the equation
42 - 2) 09) 0.
Since Z is a large number, the following approximate method
gives what is wanted. Put d:: perve; we then obtain the equation
' 17): 0,
2Tr
where


===== PDF PAGE 0356 =====

3.28
APPENDIX XXVI
Neglecting the term multiplied by h, we get
and therefore
If we substitute the expression for F(r), the integration can be carried
out, and we find
where no is given by the equation
C053n0 = 212 - 2)8
If we expand the exponent in powers of the quantity on the right,
we obtain finally the approximation
The disintegration constant 1 is therefore given by
87?e?(2-2)
16тe
10g 1=1084mi2
---
- Vm(Z - 2)ro,
or, numerically,
105101=20-16-1-191 x 1002-2+1-081 X 100VZ-2/70;
here X is measured in sec.-1
, and is connected with the half-value period
by the equation
T = -
loge 2
0•6931
The law thus obtained differs from the empirical formula of Geiger
and Nuttall in this respect, that it is not linear in v, but in 1/v; however,
since the variation of v is confined to comparatively narrow limits,
from v = 1•4 X 10ª cm./sec. to v = 2•0 X 10º cm./sec., the difference
is slight. In consequence of the large factor in the second term-in
which o appears--the range of values of the disintegration constant
is extremely wide.


===== PDF PAGE 0357 =====

APPENDIX XXVII
329
XXVII. The Stefan-Boltzmann Law and Wien's Displacement Law
(p. 187).
The thermodynamical proof of the Stefan-Boltzmann law rests
on the existence of radiation pressure.
We imagine an enclosure shut
off by a movable piston with a reflecting surface. The radiation field
exerts a pressure on the piston; its magnitude is a function of u, the
energy density of the radiation in the enclosure. In fact, both Maxwell's
theory and the quantum (corpuscular) theory of light give the formula
This radiation pressure is due to the momentum which the radiation
carries with it. In the case of the quantum theory this is clear, for
according to this theory each light quantum of energy hr possesses
momentum hv/c. Maxwell's theory also ascribes to every radiation
field, with energy-donsity 2, the "momentum density" 81= " - del5),
where S is the Poynting vector; this is proved, e.g., by imagining a
plane light wave to fall on a mctal, where it is absorbed, and calcu-
lating the resulting force on the metal from Maxwell's equations. On
both theories, then, the momentun contained in a definite volume
of the radiation field is equal to the radiation energy contained in this
volume divided by c. The rest of the calculation of the radiation
pressure is now just like that of the mechanical pressure in the kinetic
theory of gascs. In the interval of time dt radiation energy
dide cos d
4:7r
falls on one square centimetre of the boundary from the solid angle
de; on reflection at the boundary it transfers to the latter a momen-
tum equal to twice the component of the radiation momentum normal
to the wall, i.e. the momentum 2 2 cut
do cos 0. If we integrate this
C 4m
expression with respect to 0 and d, where du = sinOded, and o
gocs from O to in, & from 0 to 2m, we obtain the pressure p = zu
as the momentum transferred to the boundary per unit time as a
result of the reflection of the radiation.
We now regard the radiation as a thermodynamic engine, and
apply the fundamental equation of thermodynamics, which includes
both the first law and the second. If W is the total energy, S the
entropy, I the absolute temperature, and V the volume, then, as
we know,
T dS = dW + pav.


===== PDF PAGE 0358 =====

33°
APPENDIX XXVII
Now W = Vu, where the energy-density u is a function of I alone;
hence
• du
IdS = udV+V
due aT + EudY.
From this we may conclude that
4u as
V due
and hence
22S
атат
=3 dI
or
Accordingly
which is the Stefan-Boltzmann radiation law. It is also easy to verify
that the entropy S' is given by S = ZaVTs.
Wien's displacement law depends on the existence of the Doppler
effect. As is well known, to an observer at rest a wave motion whose
source is moving appears to have its frequency altered. In actual fact,
it is only the component of the velocity in the line of observation that
is effective, and we have the formula
- cost, where v is the tre-
quency, A the change of frequency, o the velocity of the source, and
o the angle between the direction in which the source is moving and
the line of observation.
Now if a mirror at which a wave of frequency y is reflected moves
with velocity v in the direction in which the light is propagated, we
may think of the incident wave as coming from a source of light at
rest. Then the reflected wave must behave as if it came from the mirror
image of this imaginary source of light. Owing to the motion of the
mirror, however, this mirror image moves in the direction of the
normal to the mirror with velocity 2v. Hence the change of frequency
due to reflection at the moving mirror is -? "
v, and for oblique inci-
dence at the angle 0 we have
20


===== PDF PAGE 0359 =====

APPENDIX XXVII
33°
Further, we can easily see that the intensity of radiation due to a
train of waves falling on the moving mirror is altered by reflection in
the same ratio. For the energy of radiation falling on the whole mirror
of area A in time dt is IA dt, and that reflected is l'Adt. The difference
must be equal to the work done by radiation pressure P in moving the
mairo, i.e. PAul; but, us shown abovo, = 2 co.8. We thus obtein
1=1 1-20 0030)
We shall now apply thermodynamics not to the total radiation
but to a definite narrow range of wave-length. Here we must take
note of the fact that whenever work is done in connexion with a
motion of the reflecting piston the radiation will be displaced into
another region of frequency according to the Doppler formula. This
displacement does not by any moans vanish when we make the mirror
move infinitely slowly. To convince ourselves of this, we imagine
the enclosure entirely surrounded by reflecting walls, so that a par-
ticular beam of light will go on moving in a zigzag path in the en-
closure, mecting the mirrors again and again. If the velocity of the
piston is now reduced to half, the number of reflections at it per
unit time will be just twice is great, so that the total Doppler
displacement as p-0 tends to a linite limit.
We shall now calculate Fu, de, the total change of energy of the
radiation in an enclosure corresponding to a definite range of frequency
(v,o-+ o-+d0) during time ol, arising from reflection at the mirror moving
with velocity o. In the first place, all components of the radiation of
this region of the spectrum which fall on the mirror are removed from
the region in question owing to the Doppler eflect. On the other hand,
all components of the radiation which before reflection loy in the
interval between and d fde will now be brought into the region
if p'=1(1+9"
cosd). The quantity of energy from the range of
frequency (v, v-t-do) falling from solid angle des on d, the ared of
the mirror, per second is
DE:: 10, 170
From this we obtain the energy thrown into the frequency range
(v, (x) on reflection by (1) multiplying by the energy factor (1 -
cos (),


===== PDF PAGE 0360 =====

332
APPENDIX XXVII
2) replacing dr by dr = dull + 2 cos 0), and (3) introducing the
expansion
ди, 2"
- cos 0.
The product of the first two factors, however, differs from du merely
by a term of the second order in v/c, which can be omitted. For the
energy diverted into the range (v, dy) by reflection we accordingly have
• A cos Odtdu dv;
the increase in the energy of the beam as a result of reflection is there-
ди, 1
" до 2т
_d/du cos" Odo,
since Avdt=dV. Integrating over the hemisphere (for which
(cos edw = 2m/3), we obtain the total increase of energy due to
reflection, d(u,V) dv. Hence, for constant v,
ov, dV.
This is a differential equation for u, as a function of v and V:
a(Vu,)
ду
-U,.
We easily see that this equation is satisfied by the relation
U, = 180(437),
where p is an arbitrary function.
We now take a step further. We imagine that the change of volume
is adiabatic, i.e. takes place without heat being supplied. This means
that the entropy of the radiation in the enclosure remains constant
during the compression. Now we saw above in deducing the Stefan-
Boltzmann law that this entropy is proportional to the product of the
volume V and the cube of the temperature, so that the constancy of
the entropy implies that
VT3 = const.
If in order to make the law of radiation independent of the size and


===== PDF PAGE 0361 =====

APPENDIX XXVIII
333
shape of the enclosure we introduce the temperature instead of V
by means of this relation, we have
2, 18(7).
which is Wien's displacement law, given in the text.
XXVIII. Absorption by an Oscillator (p. 189).
We shall now add the proof of the formula
1 те-
SW=
3 m
-U.
given in the text for the work done per second by a radiation field on
an oscillator. We define the radiation field by stating the relationship
between the electric vector E and the time. For reasons of conver-
gence we shall assume that the radiation field exists only between
the instants t = 0 and t = T; it is casy to pass to the limiting case
T → co subsequently. We now express one component, e.g. Ex, by
its spectrum (Fourier integral),
+-00
Ex (t) =
- 00
where the amplitudes f(v) are determined by
Eat) being zero outside the interval t = 0 to t= T; as E. is real,
the conjugate complex quantity satisfies the equation
f*(x) = f(-v).
Analogous relationships hold for the two other components. According
to the laws of clectrodynamies, the total energy-density of the radiation
field is then given by
U =
87r
the last of these relations follows from symmetry. The bars denote
time-averages. Further,


===== PDF PAGE 0362 =====

334
APPENDIX XXVIII
if we replace one factor by the above Fourier expression. If we now
change the order of integration, we immediately obtain, as the value
of the new integral with respect to t has been shown to be f"(v),
f(x) f*(v) du=
IS. 15(0) 120,
as
Hence for the total density of radiation we obtain the expression
and for the distribution over the spectrum we therefore have
After these preliminary remarks on the radiation field we now pass
on to the equation giving the vibrations of the linear harmonic oscil-
lator. If the oscillator is capable of vibrating only in the x-direction,
this equation is
and the proper frequency is accordingly given by
m 27770) 3 = 0; 10 =
1 a
Now, as we know, the most general solution of a non-homogeneous
differential equation is obtained by adding one solution of the non-
homogeneous equation to the general solution of the homogeneous
equation. This last may be written in the form
x(t) = x, sin (2TTVt +Ф),
where x, and o are two arbitrary constants.
The expression
x(t) =
is a solution of the non-homogeneous equation and satisfies the initial


===== PDF PAGE 0363 =====

APPENDIX XXVIII
335
ditiat mo) and to the die entit evident; to prove the
х(t) =
2mUM
here the first term vanishes, and we see that x(0) = 0. Then
that is, the expression given above is actually a solution of the non-
homogeneous differential equation.
We now proceed to investigate the work done by the field on the
oscillator. From the differential equation of the vibrations we readily
see (multiplication by x and integration with respect to the time leads
to the energy theorem) that the work done per unit time is given by
SW=
7 / 2(1) a t) at.
Now it is obvious that the part of the work done which arises from
the free vibration (the solution of the homogeneous equation) vanishes.
Hence the work done per second is obtained by evaluating the integral
of the remaining part only:
8W = -
T m
The integrand is obviously symmetrical in t and t; hence the ex-
pression for SW may be transformed in the following way. We see
immediately that
SW =.
MT
For in the first instance we have to integrate with respect to t be-
tween the limits 0 and t and subsequently with respect to t between
the limits 0 and t; but of course we obtain the same result by in-
tegrating first with respect to t from t' to + and then with respect to


===== PDF PAGE 0364 =====

336
APPENDIX XXIX
t' from O to r. If we now merely interchange the letters t and i,
SW may also be written in the form
or, if we replace cos 2volt - t) by
8W=
e?
Thus the work done by the field per second on the linear oscillator is
е? 2тт
те"
SW =
, U, =
2mT
3m
if we use the formula deduced above for the density of radiation; we
thus obtain the expression given in the text.
XXIX. Temperature and Entropy in Quantum Statistics (p. 211).
The proof of the fact that the quantity & occurring in statistics
is inversely proportional to the absolute temperature can be pre-
sented in the same form for all three types of statistics, the Boltz-
mann (B.), the Bose-Einstein (B.E.), and the Fermi-Dirac (F.D.). The
fundamental formula for the probability of a state for all three statistics.
can be unified by introducing the symbol
0 for B.
-1 for B.H.
1+1 for F.D.
We then have
The maximum of this, subject to the subsidiary conditions
Ing = N,
ZNsE, = E,


===== PDF PAGE 0365 =====

APPENDIX XXIX
337
is attained for
d log W,
a + BEg =
= 10g(9 - 10) + 290-1 - 10gn, - 1.
The second term of the last expression is equal to zero for y = 0, and
equal to 1 for y = I1; we can therefore replace it simply by y?:
a + BE, =10g(9s -yn) - logntz-1.
Hence
9s
Ns=-
Here a and & are to be determined by the two subsidiary condition,
(involving N, E).
Using this value of n, in log W, we find
We now assume that the system (a gas) is enclosed in a vessel of vari-
able volume; this volume may be defined, say, by the position co-
ordinate a of a piston. Thus the energy values es are functions of a.
If changes in a are made extremely slowly, no quantum jumps are
excited by these changes; the numbers n, for the quantum states are
therefore not changed. Such processes are called "adiabatic " (a better
word would be "quasistatic"). The work done in a small change is
dEs Sa = - K8a,
SA = In, dEs = INs da
where
дед
K=- Ins za
denotes the force (pressure) which opposes the alteration of a.
If, however, the change of a takes place rapidly, uncontrollable
quantum jumps occur, and therefore alterations in the values ns.
The corresponding change in the energy is called " heat supplied":
8Q = Les0Ng.
The total change of energy is the sum
SE = 8A + 8Q = Enges + Le, 8ng.


===== PDF PAGE 0366 =====

338
APPENDIX XXX
The change in log W is
8 log W = In 8(1-p+a+BEs) +(1-1270)2815
Here it is to be noted that not only es but also a and B are to be
regarded as functions of a. Now we have
281, = 0,
also
For B.E. and F.D., g? = 1; hence this last expression is equal to
-n,S(a+ BEs).
For B., y = 0, and, on account of ng = ge-1-a-Bes,
Ing8(1+ a +BEs) = Egse 1-a-858(1+a+ BEs)
=- 20ng = 0.
In both cases we are left with
log W = BLE,ONg = B8Q.
It follows that is an integrating factor of the differential of the heat;
& must therefore be proportional to I/T. Putting
B =TI"
we have
8Q = kT 8 1og W;
and since this, according to the second law of thermodynamics, has to
be equal to IdS, we obtain for the entropy
S = k log W,
which is Boltzmann's celebrated formula.
XXX. Thermionic Emission of Electrons (p. 221).
Here we shall prove the two tormula which we gave in the text
for the thermionic emission of electrons (the Richardson effect) firstly
on the basis of classical statistics and secondly on the basis of the


===== PDF PAGE 0367 =====

APPENDIX XXX
339
Fermi-Dirac statistics. For this we require to calculate the number
of electrons striking one square centimetre of the boundary in the
metal per second, such that the kinetic energy of their motion normal to
the boundary is sufficient to carry the electron over the energy barrier
of height a which represents the boundary. We have therefore to
determine, on the basis of the distribution law, the number of electrons
for which, e.g.,
We begin with classical statistics. On this basis the number of
electrons whose velocity lies between v and v + du is given by
aN = ArnV
(p. 15); similarly (replacing tru du by du du, du, and integrating)
the number of electrons with a velocity component between va and
va t dus is
=nT
m
2тkT
To find the number of electrons falling on unit area of the boundary
per second we have first to divide the above number by V, to get the
density of the electrons, and then multiply by vas as in unit time
there impinge on the boundary all the molecules with the component
"x which were contained in the layer of breadth v. in front of the boun-
dary (§ 3, p. 5). We thus obtain the emission current by evaluating
the integral
co
i = en
V(2ea/m)
This integral may be evaluated exactly, giving
i= en
- e-salkI,
V 2mm
which is the expression stated in the text.
The calculation takes a similar course in the case of the Fermi
distribution. Here we start from the distribution function (p. 216)
aN =
eatelkI + 1


===== PDF PAGE 0368 =====

340
APPENDIX XXXI
where a, the degeneracy parameter, is determined from the subsidiary
condition faN = N. If, however, we confine our attention to relatively
low temperatures (room temperatures), we can use the approximate
formula given on p. 219,
8TV VaMOV Ede
dN = -
8m Vm3
va du
where
• = 2 (3)
represents the zero-point energy. Here, just as before, we obtain the
Richardson current by evaluating the integral
2m3ec+00+00
i=
dox.
Now in a metal at room temperature (ea - eo) is always very large
compared with kT, (fa- eo) amounting to several electron-volts
(p. 222), while kT at 300° K. corresponds to an energy of about
0-03 electron-volt. Hence in the integrand we always have el*-ro) kl » 1,
so that we may neglect the 1 in the denominator, thus obtaining the
integral
2m°e
i=
do, dv))
We Em +03+0345 do.
V (26a/m)
The integrations with respect to vy and ve are equivalent to evaluations
of Gaussian error integrals (see Appendix I, p. 259); the integration
with respect to x can, as before, be carried out by elementary means,
giving
i=
ATE: (2) 0-180-03137,
the law stated in the text.
XXXI. Theory of Valency Binding (p. 253).
The fundamental idea of the Heitler-London theory of valency
binding is as follows. As a model of the hydrogen molecule we imagine
two nuclei a and b on the x-axis at a distance R apart, and two elec-
trons 1 and 2 revolving about the nuclei. To the state of two widely-
separated neutral atoms there corresponds a large value of R and a
motion of the electrons such that each one revolves round one of the .
two nuclei. Let the two atoms be in the ground state and have the


===== PDF PAGE 0369 =====

APPENDIX XXXI
34I
same energy E, = E. = Eo. The motion of the electrons is described
by proper functions u, which, relative to the corresponding nuclei, are
identical; that is, one is obtained from the other by substituting
x + R for x; we shall briefly write them in the form
4a(4) =26(21, 41, 71),
The functions u are the same as the proper functions of atomic hydrogen
(Appendix XVIII (p. 298)). Hence the two Schrödinger equations
where H° denotes the energy operator of the hydrogen atom, are satisfied
identically and the suffixes a and b indicate that in the one case the
co-ordinates of the electron are relative to the nucleus a, in the other
to the nucleus b (see above).
The energy operator of the molecule which arises when the atoms
approach one another (when R diminishes) differs from the sum
Ha + H, by the interaction energy of the two atoms,
V =
+
1-1-2.
Tab
where ra denotes the distance between the two nuclei (R), 'i the dis-
tance between the two electrons, and laz, lo the distances between
either electron and the nucleus of the other atom. For the molecule
we accordingly have the Schrödinger equation
We now seek to find an approximate solution for this equation by
assuming that (to a first approximation) the function ,? of the co-
ordinates of the two electrons is a product of some proper function ya"
of one electron and some proper function y, of the other electron.
Here, however, we have to bear in mind that the state of the system
is a degenerate one. The total energy of the two separated atoms,
E = Ed+ E2 = 2E,,
corresponds not only to the product 4a 4(3) but also to da" and
every possible combination of the two expressions. These two vibra-
tional forms will interact much more strongly with each other than
with the vibrations corresponding to any other energy levels, owing
(E 908)
23


===== PDF PAGE 0370 =====

342
APPENDIX XXXI
to the coupling as the two atoms approach one another. They
accordingly suffice as a basis for a rough approximation, i.e. we
attempt to represent the function f1, 2) approximately by a linear
combination of the two functions 4a"f?) and 4a?)f"). Instead
of these we may also start from the symmetric and antisymmetric
combinations
4som. =4464362 +4a3f',
Mantis. =444(2) -443434,
a course which has two advantages: (1) closer investigation shows that
to a first approximation the symmetric function and the antisymmetric
function are not coupled with one another by the Schrödinger equation,
1.e. that each function by itseli represents a separate state of the mole-
cule; (2) they may readily be distinguished by means of the spin.
For according to the exclusion principle the proper functions of a
system must be antisymmetric in all the co-ordinates of the two
electrons (of course taking the spin into account; cf. p. 209). If
we were to give the electrons spin variables, as we did in the case of
atomic spectra (§ 8, p. 169), the corresponding spin function would
have to be antisymmetric for sym, and symmetric for Vantis. in order
to satisfy the exclusion principle. This means that in the case of
"sym. the spins are antiparallel and balance one another, whereas in
the case of dantis. they are parallel and additive.
Now the perturbation calculation shows that when the two atoms
are brought closer together (when the coupling is increased) the proper
value of the uncoupled system (2Eo) is split up into two values
Eg = 2E, - Wy, Ez= 2Eo + W2
where the functions W(R) have the following meanings:
W, = H,8 + Ha
HIS - Hг.
W, =
1+5
1-S
5=1144464 dryda
the integrations being taken over the co-ordinates of the two elec-
trons.
As t, apart from a factor, represents the density of the
charge-cloud of the electron, the first integral represents the Coulomb
force due to the mutual actions of the charges distributed over each


===== PDF PAGE 0371 =====

APPENDIX XXXII
343
atom.
The second integral is characteristic of the quantum theory,
as here the proper functions are not related quadratically, so that an
interpretation based on charge-densities is not possible. This integral
is known as the "exchange integral"
The evaluation of the integral as a function of R, which is very
troublesome, gives the curves shown in fig. 7, p. 243 for the energy
as a function of the distance between the two atoms. The function
Ysyn., which is symmetrical in the co-ordinates of the electrons, gives the
lower curve, according to which the energy for a given intramolecular
distance has a minimum, while the antisymmetric function Yantis.
gives the monotonically ascending branch of the curve, which corre-
sponds to a permanent repulsion between the two atoms. It turns
out, therefore, that the state that leads to binding is that for which
the electronic spins balance one another. Thus it comes about that
we may regard the spin as a physical substitute for the chemical
valency. But, as was mentioned in the text, in the case of polyatomic
molecules this idea leads to difficulties which have only partly been
overcome (Heitler, Rumer, Weyl).
XXXII. Theory of the van der Waals Forces (p. 291).
According to London, the theory of the van der Waals forces rests on
a fact which is a distinctive feature of the quantum theory, namely, the
existence of a finite zero-point energy (cf. the case of the harmonic oscil-
lator (Appendixes XV, p. 291, XVI, p. 295)). According to the classical
theory, the state of least energy of an oscillator is that of zero energy;
this is the state of rest in the position of equilibrium. According
to wave mechanics, however, the ground state has a finite energy
Eo = 3hr, and the corresponding proper function is the Gaussian
error function 4o = de-bag?
, where a - 1ramro and yo is the proper
frequency of the oscillator. This zero-point energy can be explained
by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, according to which if the energy
of a particle is prescribed accurately its position cannot be accurately
determined. The proper function, which is a Gaussian error function,
expresses the uncertainty directly. For the error curve immediately
gives the mean square deviation of the co-ordinate (as g = 0):
+- co
940 da
= g*=
• 00
1
+00
-=
2a
toda
- 00


===== PDF PAGE 0372 =====

344
APPENDIX XXXII
On the other hand, from the energy equation we have
if the energy is accurately determined, the mean square deviation of
the momentum is
др = т (2т)—т.
Hence
or, with (g)" = 8g*, (Др) = бр?:
h
бр бд =.
This is the exact form of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle põg
(see Appendix XII, p. 282, and Appendix XXII, p. 312).
After this digression on the zero-point energy and the theoretical
uncertainties of the position and the momentum when the energy is
determined accurately, we now return to London's explanation of the
occurrence of the van der Waals forces. As a simple model we consider
two linear oscillators at a distance R apart, vibrating in the direction
of the line joining them (the x-axis). We think of these oscillators as
vibrating electrical dipoles in which the positive charges e are held
fast in the position of equilibrium while the negative charges —e
vibrate about these equilibrium positions, their displacements being
xy and Xy.
We express the restoring forces on the oscillators in the
form -x, and - -Xa; their potential energies are then
_ x1?
and be. I adition there is the couling force arting between
the two oscillators, for which we assume Coulomb's law of force. The
potential energy of this interaction is
R+X1+XZ
R + x2
or, if we assume that R is very large compared with xy and xy, and
expand, we have
20-x, 22
R3
Hence the energy equation for the two oscillators is of the form


===== PDF PAGE 0373 =====

APPENDIX XXXII
345
22 x)22
W=
=(x2+222)+
2m
20
R$
In the absence of the coupling term the resonators would themselves
vibrate with the frequency
1
% =
V
am
If the coupling is taken into account the frequency, as we have re-
peatedly stated before, is split up. Here we shall carry out the actual
calculation of the splitting. For this purpose it is most convenient to
refer the quadratic expression for the potential energy to " principal
axes ". this does not affect the form of the kinetic energy. This is
done by means of the transformation
X, =
X a=
(x1 - Xz);
V2
V2
as p = mx, we also have
Ps =
(P1 + P2), Pa=
(P1 - P2).
V2
v2
If we substitute these new co-ordinates and momenta in the expression
for the energy, we have
W=
or, in another form,
This, however, is the energy equation for two non-coupled oscillators
vibrating with the two frequencies
Hence the quantised energy of the system is
which depends on R, as the new frequencies are functions of the


===== PDF PAGE 0374 =====

346
APPENDIX XXXII
distance between the oscillators. For the ground state we obtain
the zero-point energy of the two vibrations of the oscillator,
E0o = 1h(vs va),
that is, if we again expand,
E oo
I Vin (a + x)
...)
The additional energy is therefore negative and inversely proportional
to the sixth power of the distance between the oscillators; the oscil-
lators will accordingly attract one another with a force varying as the
inverse seventh power of the distance between them. The magnitude
of the attraction also depends on y and on the square of the constant a,
which is obviously a measure of the deformability of the oscillators.
Exactly similar considerations apply to any atomic system in which
there is interaction between the constituents, and invariably lead to
the result that between two systems in the ground state there will be
a force of attraction whose potential energy is inversely proportional
to the sixth power of the distance and whose magnitude is proportional
to the product of the deformabilities of the two atoms.


===== PDF PAGE 0375 =====

BIBLIOGRAPHY
GENERAL
N. Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, Cambridge University
Press, 1934.
A. Sommerfeld, Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines, Methuen, 1930.
A. E. Ruark and H. C. Urey, Atoms, Molecules and Quanta, New York, McGraw-
Hill, 1930.
E. N. da C. Andrade, The Structure of the Atom, Bell, 1934.
C. G. Darwin, The New Conceptions of Mutter, Bell, 1931.
CHAPTER I
J. H. Jeans, The Dynamical Theory of Gases, Cambridge University Press, 1925.
E. Bloch, The Kinetic Theory of Gases, Methuen, 1924.
R. G. J. Fraser, Molecular Rays, Cambridge University Press, 1931.
CHAPTERS II, III
Sir J. J. Thomson and G. P. Thomson, Conduction of Electricity through Gases,
3rd edn., Cambridge University Press, 1928.
K. K. Darrow, Electrical Phenomena in Gases, Baillière, Tindall & Cox, London,
1932.
M. Born, Einstein's Theory of Relativity, Methuen.
A. S. Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation, Cambridge University Press.
F. W. Aston, Mass-Spectra und Isotopes, Arnold.
Sir D. Rutherford, J. Chadwick and C. D. Ellis, Radiations from Radioactive
Substances, Cambridge University Press, 1930.
CHAPTERS IV, V
N. Bohr, The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution, Cambridge University
Press, 1922.
M. Born, The Mechanics of the Atom, Bell, 1927.
A. H. Compton, X-Rays and Electrons, Macmillan, 1927.
I. de Broglie and L. Brillouin, Selected Papers on Wave Mechanics, Blackie, 1928.
P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Clarendon Press (second
edition).
347


===== PDF PAGE 0376 =====

348
BIBLIOGRAPHY
F. Frenkel, Wave Mechanics, Elementary Theory, Clarendon Press, 1932.
W. Heisenberg, The Principles of the Quantum Theory, University of Chicago
N. F. Mott, An Outline of Wave Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 1930.
E. Schrödinger, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics, Blackie, 1928.
CHAPTER VI
I. Pauling and S. Goudsmit, The Structure of Line Spectra, MoGraw-Hill, 1930.
P. does, 198i%, Band Spectra and Moleriar Structure, Cambridge University
Faraday Society, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure, 1930.
CHAPTER VII
K. K. Darrow, Elementare Einführung in die Physikalische Statistik, Leipzig,
Hirzel, 1931; English translation in Physical Review Supplement, 1, p. 90
(1929).
R. H. Fowler, Statistical Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 1929.
CHAPTER VIII
P. Debye, Polar Molecules, Chemical Catalogue Company, New York, 1929.
G. B. B. M. Sutherland, Infra-red and Raman Spectra, Methuen, 1935.
R. de L. Kronig, The Optical Basis of the Theory of Valency, Cambridge


===== PDF PAGE 0377 =====

INDEX
Abegg, 249.
Berzelius, 249•
Bessel function, 297.
= pays, 3e, Toss of,
Action variables, 284.
Adiabatic invariants, 101-4, 285
Bethe, 59, 83, 3,12.
- processes, 337:
Binding and spin, 343.
Affinity, electronic, 250, 252.
_atomic, 249.
Alkalies, electrons in, 166.
- benzene, 249.
Alpha emission, 179-83.
- cohesion, 249.
- particle, in nucleus, 182.
- diamond, 249.
- — loss of, 36.
• energies, бI.
- rays, 30, 32.
•energy of D, 65.
- bombarding, 6I, 64.
- heteropolar, 249-53•
• — capture of, bI.
homopolar, 243, 249
- - scattering of, 276.
in nucleus, 56-8, 182
Anderson, 43, 175,
- ionic, 249.
Angle variables, 284.
- metallic, 249.
Angular momentum, 320.
- as operator, 302.
— types of, 248.
- half-integral, 178.
Birg ancy 1299, e1, 3-5, 340.
- (helium atom), 152, 154.
- in wave mechanics, 127-30.
Birkhoff, II.
- of nucleus,
, I77, 178.
Black body, 186.
• — orbital and spin, 137-9.
Blackett, P
. M. S., 43.
- — quantizing of, 99-10I, 109, II9, I38,
Bleakney, 64.
Bloch, 225
Annihilation of pairs, 43.
Bohr, Niels, 72, 84, 91, 115, 152, I6I, 230,
Anode rays, 28.
Antiparallel, 147, 155, I59, 342.
- atom, 72, 91, 98, 286, 294, 300.
Antisymmetric function, 342, 343•
Bohr's theory and matrix mechanics, 294
Iston, F. W., 29, 37, 50, 00
\tom, electronic distribution in, 103
— — difficulties in, 115
Boltzmann, 189, I9I, 203, 205, 200, 2XI-I4,
- model of nuclear, 54
- synthesis of. I6I-(
Atomic number, 53, I6r.
Boltzmann's constant (k), 7
- structure, experiments for, 51.
— law of distribution, 14, 325-
_ theory, beginnings of, 52.
Bombardment, 176, 179.
- weight, 2, 57, 58.
- with a-rays, 61, 64.
Avogadro, 2.
— with y-rays, 65.
- number (L), 3, 19-23.
= with protons, 62, 64
Bonhaffer, 245-
Bormann, 18
Bainbridge, 60, 62.
Born, 83, 116, 117, I18, I3I, 196, 200, 250,
Balmer, 93-
251, 252
- series, 93, 94.
- term, 94, 238, 290.
Born and Infeld, 50.
Band spectra, 238-47.
Born's new field theory, 272-4.
Bose-Einstein statistics, 203, 207, 209-16,
Barrier, potential, 222, 223•
Beam, molecular, splitting of, 168.
336.
Beats, 78, 133, 134
Bothe, 40, 76.
Boyle, 6
., 7.
Becker, 40.
Brackett series, 93, 94.
Benzene, 249, 256, 257.
Bergmann series, I12.
Bragg, 68
Brickwedde, 6o.
Bernoulli, 5.
349


===== PDF PAGE 0378 =====

350
INDEX
Brillouin, 225.
Degeneration, gas, 212.
Brownian movement, 21, 268.
= of electrons, 8o.
Bucherer, 47•
Dempster, 37•
Dennison, 245•
Cabannes, 237, 238, 246.
Depolarization, 237.
Canal rays, 28
Deslandres term, 100, IOI, 238, 239.
Canonical conjugate, I05.
Determinism, 90.
- variables, 284, 285.
Deuteron, 59.
Carbon valency of, 256.
Deuton, 59•
Carolus cell, 238.
Deviation, mean square, 266.
Cathode.rays, 25.
Diagonal, principal, 293.
causation
Cavity radiation, 185-94, 200.
Diamagnetic, 166, 224.
Diamond, 249, 256.
Cell, of size h°
Centigrade scale, 8:
Dielectric constant, 232-4•
Diffraction, 67, 68.
Chadwick, J., 40, 60, 6I, 65, 279.
- of electrons, 80-2, 85, 221.
Chaos, molecular, 4.
— of molecular rays, 82.
Charles, 7.
Diffuse series, I12, I51.
Classicat deas, Failure o, 6n, 70.
atomic theory in, I.
Diffusion, 262, 264.
Diplon, 59.
Clausius, 5, 9, 18.
Dipole, 255:
Cloud chamber. See Wilson cloud chamber.
Dipole, oscillating, 133, 275, 311.
Cockcroft, 62,
Cockeroft, 6c,, 33, 228, 236, 372.
- moment, 132, 246, 247, 304, 3II.
- molecular, 229, 230, 232, 235, 236.
Cohesion, theory of, 235, 255, 256.
- permanent, 233.
Cold discharge, 182, 222.
Dirac, P. A. M., 41, 43, 84, 134, 138, 142,
Collision experiments, 73, 74.
Combination lines, 73.
Dirac's relativistic wave mechanics, 173-6,
Commutation laws
(matrices), 1I8, I2I,
— theory of holes, 175, 176.
Compton, A. H., 68, 75.
— — of spin, 173.
- effect, 75-7, 87, 279.
Directional quantization, io.
Condon, 182.
Disintegration constant, 328.
Conductivity, 217, 224, 226, 261, 263.
- nuclear, 61-5, 326.
Convergence limit, 241, 242.
_ of D, 65.
Correspondence principle, 9r, 94, 95, 96,
Dispersion, anomalous, 234.
98, 11O, III, I32, 308, 318.
Displacement law, Wien's, 186-8.
Cosmic rays, 42, 43, 69.
Coulomb's law, 54. •
Bearin, an at 15 lavo, 14.
- most probable, 10-I4.
- of energy, 9.
Crookes, Sir W., 32.
Döpel, 62.
Crystal, diffraction at, 68.
Doppler effect, 17, 187, 330, 331.
Double refraction, 237, 238.
- structure, 68.
Doublets, 149, 156, 157.
Curie, Irène, 40, 64.
Drude, 217.
— P. and M., 30, 36.
Dulong and Petit's law, 193, 194, 217.
Curie's law, 234, 326.
Junoyer, 16
Czerny, 242.
Synamid, 52
d-terms, III.
Eddington, fine structure constant, 151.
Dalton, I.
Effective cross-section, 49.
Davisson, 80, 222.
Ehrenfest's principle, 1o1, 103.
De Broglie, 8o, 81, 118, 119, 204, 221.
Ehrenhaft, 21.
- equation, 8I, 82.
Einstein, 27, 55, 70, 71, 72, 80, 84, 194,
- theory, 77.
83, 257.
195, 200, 203, 207, 209-16, 269, 270.
Einstein's law (E = mc*), 46, 62, 274.
Electron, 25, 38
Do to 5p, 5, 105, 196, 397, 55.
— Born's new theory of, 272.
- (/, 15 0, 02), 25-7.
, 217
— law, 234.
Debye-Schei rer rings, 81.
Dee, 62.
- properties of, 45.
- radius of, 48, 49, 50.
Deformability, 230, 346.
Degeneracy, 106, 159, 213, 214, 216, 218,
— recoil, 76.
— spinning, 137, 170.
- (ot 5, 2180, 2 008
— theory of metals, 217-27.
= volt, 55.
- parameter, 213, 218, 219.
Degenerate system, 341.
Electrons and specific heat, 217, 220.
- distribution in atoms, 163-6.


===== PDF PAGE 0379 =====

INDEX
351
Electrovalency, 250.
Free path (electronic), 224.
Elipen orbipar See B5/
Frequencies, molecular, 242, 243.
See Bohr atom.
Ellis, 180.
Fresnel, 66
Elsasser, 80.
Friedrich, 30
Fringes, diffraction, 66-8
EmissiVe power, 186.
Elster
Fundamental series, 112, 151.
numbers.
See
Gaede, 264
Gamma emission, from nucleus, 179-81
- distribution o23 3:
Gay-Lussac, 2, 7.
Geiger, 76.
- Inertia of, 46.
- interaction, 34I.
Cư Can at no, 96, 46: 38:
- kinetic, of gas, 6.
- levels Schrodinger's equation, 302.
Gerlach, 16, 11, 109, 127, 167. 168.
== (matric, 7), 242.
Gockaber, 6o, 65-
— (terms), 94.
Goldschmidt, 231.
- (two electrons), 320.
Goldstein, 28.
magnetic, 323.
Gordon, 83, 131.
mass of, 46.
Goudsmit, 137.
• negative (< - moc"), 174-6.
Grating spaces, 231.
- of point charge, 47, 48.
Gray, 176.
- terms, in wave mechanics, 124.
Grotrian, 156.
- thermal, 323.
Ground state, 73, 74•
- trough, 226.
- terms, 103-5•
Entropy, 338.
Group theory, 130, 139.
— (Boltzmann), 21I.
- velocity, 78, 281.
- in statistics, 336.
Guije, +7
_ of radiation, 329.
Gurney, 182.
Equipartition, theorem of, 9.
Equivalence of electrons, 160, 319, 320.
Haber, 252.
Error function, 295, 317, 343-
Hafnium, 115.
Estermann, 235•
Half-value period, 31.
Euler
Euler, b6.
245•
Hall effect, 226.
Hallwachs, 71.
Ewald, 251.
Halogens, electrons in, ifb.
Exchange integral, 343.
Hamilton-Jacobi equation, 234.
Excitation energy, 77, 254-
Hamiltonian (H), 122. 123.
- thermal, 74.
— theory, 203.
Exclusion principle. See Pauli's exclusion
Harkins, t+.
principle.
Harteck. 07, 245.
Heat radiation, 155-07-
f-terms, I11:
Heaviside, 45-
Faraday (unit), 21, 27, 28.
Heary hydrogen, 5y-h1, 9%.
Feather, 64.
- water, Ju-bi.
Heisenberg, 57. to. M4. Ne. 115, 135, 11°7,
ermi, 50, 05
Permi-Dirac statistics, 209, 214-23, 330
115, 133, 135,170, 205, 245, 240, 255,
339.
310.
Fine structure, 108, 149.
Heitler, 57, 253, 343
- _ constant, 150, 151.
Heider-Landon Theury, 343
Fitzgerald contraction, 270.
Helium atom, 152.
Fizeau, I7.
- ionized. 97.1o%.
_ term scheme fur 155.150.
Fluctuation phenomena, 20.
Fluorescence, resonance, 88.
Herapath, 3.
Hermite's polynumials, 2yt.
— sensitized, 88.
Fourier integral, 333-
Hertz, bo.
- resolution, 101.
Hertz, H.,
71, 255.
Hertz fand Franck), 73,74
— series, 285.
- - (generalized), 314.
Herzberg, 57, 255.
Fowler, A., 108.
Hess. 72.
Fowler, R. H., 29, 181, 225, 226.
Hiller, 245.
Hirtort, 25.
Franck, and 712, 2, 73 79: 353-
Hole theury, 257.
Free path, 17-19.
Houston, 157, 225.


===== PDF PAGE 0380 =====

352
INDEX
Hückel, 256.
Hull, 46, 68.
Hulme, 181.
Huys, 24,563,57, 256, 319.
Koam, 5,3,649, 250.
Hydration, 231:
91-9.
- — (Schrödinger), 123, 125, 126, 298.
Lagenture polynomials, 302,
Hydrogen-like, 148.
Jandé, 250.
Hydrogen molecule, 253.
- proper functions of,
- terms, peculiarity in, 149.
- — Sommerfeld's formula, 150.
Hylleraas, 127
Hyperbolic orbits, 130.
Lame, Frequeasy, xog, I8O, 14T.
= path, 276.
Hyperfine structure, nuclear 177.
Ideal gas ?
Indistinguishability, 159, 207. 321.
Inert gases, I66.
Lenard, 52, 53, 71.
Inertia of energy, 274.
Levels, energy, 73.
Inner quantum number, 139, 149.
Integrals, evaluation of, 259.
Lewis and Macdonald, бо.
Intensity of spectral line, 134.
Interaction, 341, 346.
Light quantum, 69-72, 194, 272.
..— energy and momentum of, 279.
_ of elections, 152, 154.
Liquefaction, 266.
Interference, 66-9.
Lissajous' figures, 106.
- electron, 227.
Lithium, binding in, 256.
— X-ray, 68.
_ distintegration of, 62.
- (Young), 89.
Livingstone, 62.
Ionic diameters, 232•
London, 253, 256, 343, 344.
Ionization chamber, 42.
Lorentz, 217, 272.
- energy, 250.
- contraction, 45.
— potentials, 163-5.
Ions, volume of, 231.
- electron theory, 44.
- force, 26, 226, 272.
Isobars, 37.
- transformation, 270, 271.
so a 34 17253, 177, 178
and sHe'), 64
- triplet, 140, 144, 312.
— (Zeeman effect), 110.
- of oxygen, бо.
Loschmidt's number (L). See Avogadro's
- separation of, 38.
- table of, 39.
Lozier, 64.
Iwanenko, 57.
Lummer, 187.
Jacobsen, 76.
Lyman series, 93, 94.
Jeans, I90, 202.
Joliot, 40, 64, 176.
McLennan,
M-terms, I13 C., 42.
Jordan, 84, 1I6, 117, 118.
Joule heat, 224.
., Boltzmann's constant,
{-terms, 113
-— orbital and spin, 145-7.
Kamerlingh Onnes, 227.
Kármán, 196, 200.
- splitting, 321.
Kaufmann, 27, 45.
Magnetism, I66.
Keesom, 255
— of electron gas, 223°
Kelvin scale (K), 8.
Magneton, Bohr, I4I, 144, I66, I68, 169,
223,326.
Kepler, 9I, 92
- problem, 286, 304.
= Weiss, 326.
Kerr cell, 238.
Mandelstam, 246.
- effect, 237.
Many-body problems, 127.
Many-electron problems, I39, 173.
Kiretioths theof ga, es 3:
Mariotte, 6, 7.
Kirchner, 62.
Mass and velocity, 47.
- defect, 55, 56, 58.
Kieich ishina, 49.
- electromagnetic, 45, 47.
Klein's paradox, 174, 175.
= relativistic, 27, 107, 108, 271.
Klemperer, 176.
Mass-spectrograph, 29, 37, 6o.
Matrices, 170.


===== PDF PAGE 0381 =====

INDEX
353
Matrices (co-ordinate, &c.), 1I7, I33, 292-
94.
- diagonal, I7I.
- product of, II7, 202.
Matrix element, meaning of, 134, 291, 292,
3II.
- energy, 293.
- mechanics, 115-8, 291.
Maxwell
, 9, 257, 262, 203, 204
Maxwell's distribution law, 15-17, 213, 260.
- equations, 44, 272.
- theory of light, 48, 232, 329.
Mayer, 25I.
Mean value, 4.
Meitner, 180.
differenate), 370:
Membrane, circular, 297.
- vibrating, 125.
- momentum, tạt
Metals, electron theory of, 217-27.
Miche, son' experiment, 269, 270.
Meyer
Orbit, Bor cianice), 252, 343
— elliptic, 300
- elliptic and circular, 286.
Milian at 420 method, 22.
— hyperbolic, 300.
Minkowski, 2,70.
Orthogonal functions, 3I4.
Mobility, ionic, 231.
Orthohelium, 156-9.
Mole, 3
Orthohydrogen, 245•
Molecular beam, 16, 17, 234.
Oscillator, 294, 343.
- absorption by, 333.
— constants, 230.
- diameters, 231.
- coupled, 344.
in matrix mechanics, 291.
- ray (beam), 10, 17.
— structure, 228.
- in wave mechanics, 123, 124, 295-
_ volume, 229, 230, 233.
- mean energy of, 189-91, 194, 202, 203.
— weight, 2.
- Planck's, 189.
Molecule, angular momentum of, 238.
- quantum, 240.
- moment of inertia of, 2,39.
— quantum energy of, 195.
- motions of, 228, 230.
- nuclear distances in, 239.
p-terms, III.
- rotating, 100.
Pair, electron, 253
- (electron + positron), 43, 175, I'70
_ vibrations in, 240.
Moment, magnetic and mechanical, 109.
Parahydrogen, 245•
Paramagnetic, 166, 224, 322.
— of inertia, electrical, 229.
Momentum
1 density, 329.
Parhelium, 156-9.
— in relativity, 271.
Paschen, 93, 100
Paschen-Back effect, 140, 155
— of a gas, 5.
- operator, I21.
Pauli, 58, 127, 169, 170, 173, 218, 223
Moseley (law for K lines), 113-5.
Mott, 83, I3I, I8I.
Müller, 32.
paulie is 354-04, 159, 109, 207,
Murphy, 60.
Neon, isotopes of, 37.
Nernst, 195-
Pendulum of varying length, 102.
Neumann, II, I39•
— orbits, 107, 108, 290.
Neumann-Schäfer, 47.
Periodic motions, IOI.
Neutrino, 58, 59, 257;
— system, theory of, бо.
Neutron, 40, 54, 64, 65, 179, 272.
= and nuclear structure, 57, 58
- table, 35:
New field theory, Born's, 50, 272, 274.
— — gaps in, II5•
Perturbation, 127, I3I, I52.
Newton, 66.
Nichols, 46.
Petterson, 6I.
Nitrogen nucleus, 178.
Phase paths, 104, 105.
Nordheim, 225, 226.
- velocity, 77, 281.
Photoelectric effect, 7I, 72.
Normalizing, 132, 3I4.
Notation for terms (helium, &c.), 158.
Photoelectron, 7I.
Photon, 69-72, 191. See Light quantum.
Nuclear chemistry, 6I.
— and electron pair, 175.
- structure, 57•
- energy and momentum of, 279.
— transformations (table), 63.
Placzek, 246.
Planck, 70, 72, 104, 185, 189, I9I, 193-5,
A gui am to 6, 77, 278.
200-3, 205-7,21I, 258.


===== PDF PAGE 0382 =====

354
INDEX
Planck's constant, 70.
- quanta, IgI.
Quantum theory of atom, 72-4.
- radiation law, I9I, 202, 205, 206, 21I.
Quasi-ergodic hypothesis, I.
Plücker, 25.
Pohl, 30.
P, the gas constant, 7.
Polarizability, 230, 232-4, 236, 246.
Rabi, I69.
Polarization in scattering, 236.
adiation, 308, 309, 311
Polyatomic molecules, 343.
- and direction, 3i
Positive rays, 28.
Positron, 4I, 54, 64, 175, 176.
- demonstrated, 43•
- theory of, 257.
Potential barrier, 222, 223.
- hollow, 225, 240.
— in crystal lattice, 225•
Poynting vector, 272, 273, 275, 329.
Precessing orbit, 107.
See Precession.
Precession, 107, 108, I4I, 143, I46, 147,
154,
Pressure of a gas, 5.
Principal quantum number, 1I4, I49.
-series, II2, I5I.
Pringsheim, 187.
Probability, 9, 183,308, 3I6.
— in wave mechanics, 83, 84.
Ramsay,
, Sir W., 30.
Proper functions, 207-9, 305.
Rarefied gases, conduction in, 24.
_ — (of operator), 3I4.
Rayleigh, 268.'
— (orthogonal), 314.
Rayleigh and Ramsay, 59.
vales, 1a%, 25, 34x:
Rayleigh-Jeans law, 189, I9I, 202.
Reflection of electrons, 80.
- — (of operator), 314,
— total
., 182.
- — parameter, 295-
Refractive index, 232, 234.
-_ problems, 122-3.
_— electron, 221, 2,22.
- vibrations, cavity, 202, 203•
Regener, 42.
.. — number of, 197-9.
Relativistic equation (Dirac), 142.
Proportions, constant and multiple, I.
Relativity and Compton effect, 279.
Proton, 38.
- and spin, 17x.
- bombarding, 62, 64.
- and two-body problem,
I73.
- disintegration of, 58.
— energy and momentum in, 77.
- long range, 63.
theory of, 260.
Proust, I.
Resonator, virtual, 134.
Prout, 34
Rest mass, 27, 271, 272.
Pump, diffusion, 264.
Richardson, 220.
— molecular, 264.
.. effect, 338.
Riecke, 217.
Quadrupole, 255•
Ritz's combination principle, 73, II3, IX7•
Rocard, 246.
Quanta, light.
— moment, 229 See Light quantum.
Röntgen, 29.
— radiation of, 73•
Rosette, 107.
Quantizable quantities, IoI.
Rotator, IO1, 105, 284.
Quantization of cavity radiation, 200.
Royds, 30.
— of orbits, 286.
Rumer, 343.
Rupp, 80, 222.
- rule, jp da = nh, 105.
Russell-Saunders coupling, 155.
~ second, 84.
Rutherford, Lord, 30, 42, 52-4, 59, 6I, 64.
Quantizing of direction, 109, 127.
Quantum (E = hv), 72.
Rutherford's atom, 54.
- conditions, 101-9, 205.
- scattering formula, 53, 126, 276, 304.
- mechanics formalism, 312
Rydberg constant, 93, 96, 97, 1I3.
- number, azimuthal, 107, III, 149, 290,
304, 3II.
s-terms, III.
- numbers, 99-101, 105-9, 150, 290.
Scattered radiation, energy of, 48.
— (3), 136, 170.
Scattering and atomic structure, 51, 52.
— (4),
160, 321.
— calculation of, 275.
- half-integral, 138, 139, I49, 294•
- factor, 305
- (helium), 152.
— formula, Rutherford's, 53, 150, 270.
(magnetic), 300, 307, 318.
— in wave mechanics, 84, I3I, 304.
- principal, 107, III, 290, 302.
— of electrons, 49, 83.
- radial, 290, 302.
- of light, 21, 48
- — (two electrons), 32I.
- of radiation, 5I.
— of X-rays, 75-7.


===== PDF PAGE 0383 =====

INDEX
355
Scattering polarization in, 236.
Scheibe, 253.
Scherrer, 68.
Schrödinger, 82, 1I6, 133, 169, 170, 274
schrödinger's equation, 122, 172, 173, 225,
304, 341.
_ - for Kepler problem, 208.
- solution for hydrogen atom, 298.
Schweidler, 31.
Scintillation, 32.
Screening, III.
- constant, II3.
- effect, 312.
Searle, 45°
Sedimentation, 2I.
Selection rules,
IOI, IIO, III, 134, 144,
I5I, 304-9, 318
Semi-conductors, 22631).
Stream vector, 305
Ser arable systems, 106, 284.
String, vibrating, 123-
Series (principal, &tc.), I12.
Stuart, 238.
~ limit, 112.
Setting, 137-9.
Supra-Condestives, 227.
Sharp series, 112, 151.
Shells, in atoms, 162-6.
Human, to a can 157, 24735.
- (K, L, M, &c.), II3.
- quantum numbers for, II4.
Shire, 37.
Showers of particles, 43.
Tarrant, 176.
Simon, 76.
Taylor, 181.
Simultaneity, 84
Television, 238.
Single (s-terms), 149, 157.
Temperature, absolute, 7.
— in statistics, 336.
Singlet (parhelium), 157.
Sky, blue, 268.
Slater, 255, 256.
Smekal, 181, 246.
Smith, 64.
Soddy, F
Sodium D-lines, x36, 139, 143, 146, 378.
- term scheme for, I12,
152, 153.
Sommerfeld, 104, 105-8, I49, 150, 218,
224, 286
Specific heat, 8, 194-200.
-- and electrons, 217, 220.
'—- (cp, ca), 9.
., 8o.
- — (difficulties), 217, 218, 220.
- - low temperatures, 195, 196, 200.
- - of metals.
80.
Spectra of alkali atoms, III, I12, 136, 137.
- X-ray, I12-5.
Transitions, 140, 3II, 312, 318, 319.
Spectral distribution of radiation, 186, 192.
- forbidden, I40.
I93•
— in magnetic field, I1o.
Spectrum band, 100.
Spherical harmonics, 299, 308-10.
Transport equation, 263.
Spin, 137.
Traubenberg, 62
- and relativity, 171.
Triplet (orthohelium), 157.
and valency, 343•
Two electrons, terms for, 319.
antiparallel, 342.
compounding of,
138, 139.
Dirac's theory of, 173.
Uhlenbeck, 137.
electron, wave theory of, 169.
moments, 143, 320.
Viet 2, 639) 9484-0, 35, 205-258,
nuclear, 57, 245.
- of electron, 136-59.
— saturation of, 254.
Splitting diagram, 3I0.
Valency and spin, 343
— factor (Landé), 144-6, 318.
- binding, 249, 253-5, 340
- of Balmer terms, 108.
— saturation, 254
- of terms, 136, 141.
Van der Waals, 235, 249.
- — and spin, 138.
Van der Waals' equation, 20, 265
- — in field, 100, 110.
- forces, 255, 343, 344.


===== PDF PAGE 0384 =====

356
INDEX
Vibrations in molecules, 240.
Viscosity, 26x, 263.
Weat: diatone a 1. 47 7.:28
, 193, 194,
Walter, 30.
329, 330, 333.
Walton, 62, 63.
- radiation law
Wasastjerna, 23I.
Wit, 8. 1: 1, 3, 200
Washburn, 60.
Water molecule, 255.
Wilson, W., 105
Wave-corpuscle, 66-90.
Wilson cloud chamber, 33, 40, 42
- contradiction, 82.
Work function, 219, 220.
_ (philosophy), 89.
Wave equation, 120, I30.
— function, 9o, 169.
X-raye, terence, 68, 8x.
- - antisymmetrical, 209.
— levels, scheme of, I13
- — conditions for, 120.
— scattering of, 75-17
_- meaning of, 130.
— spectra, II2-5.
- — symmetrical, 208.
— spectra, notation, 152.
Wave-length, 69.
— terms, I50.
— of electronic beams, 8I.
- tube, 29.
Wave mechanics, I18-35.
-- and spin, 138.
Young, 66.
Leeman effect, 126, 3I8.
—— and nucleus, 178.
— nature of matter, 77.
—— anomalous, II5,
129. 140, 142, 143,
- pumbe, 80, 83.
144-8, 155, 166, 168, 318.
—— normal, IIO, III,
140, 142, 144-8,
- theory of light, 66-9.
155, 312.
- theory of spin, I6g.
Zero-point energy, 125, 218, 219, 223, 294,
Wentzel, 83
29,5, 343, 346.
- motion, 256.


===== PDF PAGE 0385 =====

BLACKIE'S BOOKS ON PHYSICS
General Physics
A Textbook of Physics. By E. Grimsehl. Edited by R. Tomaschek,
D. Phil.
Authorized translation by L. A. Woodward, B.A.(Oxon.),
Ph.D.(Leipzig), and (Vol. IV) W. M. Deans, M.A., B.Sc.
Vol. I. Mechanics. I5s. net
Vol. II, Heat and Sound. 12s. 6d. net.
Vol. III. Electricity and
Magnetism.
Vol. IV. Optics. 15s. net
25s. net.
Vol. V. Physics of the Atom. 17s. 6d. net
Thermodynamics. By Enrico Fermi, Professor of Physics, Royal
University of Rome. I2s. 6d. net.
Practical Physics for Inter. B.Sc. Students. By H. M. Browning,
M.Sc., Ph.D.(Lond.), F.Inst.P., and L. Starbuck, B.Sc., A.Inst.P.
35. 6d. net.
Physical Principles of Electricity and Magnetism. By R. W.
Pohl, Professor of Physics in the University of Göttingen. 17s. 6d. net.
Physical Principles of Mechanics and Acoustics. By R. W. Pohl.
I'7s. 6d. net.
The Physics of Solids and Fluids, WITH RECENT DEVELOPMENTS.
By P. P. Ewald, Stuttgart; Th. Pöschl, Karisruhe; and L. Prandtl,
Göttingen. Second Edition. I7s. 6d. net. In two parts. Part I. Crys-
tals by P. P. Ewald, and Elasticity by Th. Pöschl. 8s. 6d. net. Part II.
Hydrodynamics by L. Prandtl. 12s. 6d. net.
Stereoscopic Drawings of Crystal Structures. Edited by M. von
Laue and R. von Mises. Twenty-four diagrams in portfolio. 2os. net,
Stereoscope, 3s. net.
Electricity and Magnetism for Electrical Engineering Students.
By A. W. Hirst, M.Sc.(Eng.), A.M.I.E.E., Chief Lecturer in Electrical
Engineering, College of Technology, Leicester. I5s. net.
The Student's Physics
A series of textbooks for university students, covering the whole
ground of Physics up to the standard of an Honours degree.
Vol. III. Properties
of Matter. By F. C. Champion, M.A.,
Ph.D. (Cantab.), and N. Davy, M.Sc. (London). 155. net.
Vol. IV. Heat and Thermodynamics. By J. K. Roberts, Ph.D.
(Cantab.). Second Edition, revised and enlarged. 22s. 6d. net.
Vol. V. The Classical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism. By
Max Abraham. Revised by Prof. Richard Becker. I55. net.
Vol. VI. Modern Physics. By H. A. Wilson,
M.Sc. (Leeds), M.A.
(Camb.), D.Sc.(Lond.), F.R.S., Professor of Physics in the Kice
Institute, Houston,
Texas,
U.S.A.
Second Edition, thoroughly
revised, with extensive additions on Quantum Mechanics and Nuclear
Physics. 3os. net.
Vol. VII. Principles of Electric and Magnetic Measurements.
By P. Vigoureux and C. E. Webb. 2os. net.
[016,]


===== PDF PAGE 0386 =====

Theoretical Physics
and Applied Mathematics
Elements of Nuclear Physics. By F. Rasetti, Professor of Spectroscopy,
Royal University, Rome; Research Associate, Columbia University.
Illustrated. I8s. 6d. net.
Atomic Spectra and Atomic Structure. By Gerhard Herberg,
Research Professor of Physics, University of Saskatchewin, 'Trans-
lated in co-operation with the author by J. W. 'T. Spinks, B.Sc.,
Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Chemistry, University of Saskatchewan.
Illustrated. I8s. 6d. net.
Atomic Physics. By Max Born, M.A. (Cantab.), Dr. phil.(Gottingen),
(Hon.)Sc.D:(Bristol), Tait Professor of Natural Philosophy in thc Uni-
versity of Edinburgh. Authorized translation from the German edition
by John Dougall, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E. Fully illustrted. Second
Edition. I7s. 6d. net.
Theoretical Physics. By Georg Joos, Professor of Physics at the
University of Jena.
Translated from the
first German edition
by Ira M. Freeman, Ph.D. (Chicago). Fully illustrated, 25s. net.
Applications of the Absolute Differential Calculus. By A. J.
McConnell, M.A., Sc.D., F.T.C.D., Doctor in Mathematies of the
University of Rome; Professor of Natural Philosophy in the
University of Dublin, 20s. net.
The Absolute Differential Calculus (Calculus of Tensors). By
Tullio Levi-Civita, Professor of Rational Mechanics in the
Uni-
versity of Rome; Fellow of R. Accademia Nazonale der Lancer.
Edited by Dr. Enrico Persico. Translated by Miss M. Long. 215. nct.
A Simplified Presentation of Einstein's Unified Field Equations.
By Tullio Levi-Civita, 2s. net.
The Dipole Moment and Chemical Structure. Edited by l'. Debye,
Professor of Experimental Physics and Director of the Physical
Institute at the University of Leipzig. Ios. net.
The Interference of Electrons. Edited by P. Debye. Authorized
translation by Winifred M. Deans, M.A., B.Sc. 7s. Gdl. net.
The Structure of Molecules. Edited by P. Debye. Authorized trans-
lation by Winifred M. Deans, M.A., B.Sc. I5s. net.
Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics. By Dr. E. Schrödinger.
formerly Professor of Theoretical Physics in the University of
Berlin; Nobel Prizeman in Physics, 1933. 25s. net.
Four Lectures on Wave Mechanics. By Dr. E. Schrödinger.
Delivered at the Royal Institution, March, 1928. 5s. net.
Selected Papers on Wave Mechanics. By Louis de Broglie, Académic
des Sciences, Paris; and Léon Brillouin, Docteur ès Scionees.
Authorized translation by Winifred M. Deans, M.A., B.Sc. 15s. net.
The Structure of Matter. By J. A. Cranston, D.Sc., F.I.C. 12s. 6d. net.
[0 16 2]


===== PDF PAGE 0387 =====

Blackie's Applied Physics Series
The Mechanical Properties of Fluids. An Account of Recent En-
gineering Research. A Collective Work. Second Edition, revised
and enlarged. With 170 illustrations.
205. net.
CRAP introduction. By Engineer Vice-Admiral
CHAL: Phenomena due to the winsticity of
Sir George Goodwin,
K.C.B
late Engincer-in-Chief of the Fleet.
LL.D.,
By Professor A, Il. Gibson,
I. Liquids and Gases.
By Allan Ferguson,
VII. The Determination
M.A., D.Sc. (Lond.).
means of Soap Films.
Im Stresses by
II. Mathematical Theory of Fluid Motion.
Taylor, M.A., L.R.S.
By
Professor Horace Lamb, LI.D.,
VIII. Wind
By A. E. M. Geddles,
F.R.S.
III. Viscosiry and Lubrication. By A. G.
IX. Submarine
Senallins and I'rans
M. Michell, M.C.E.
nission of Sound through Water
IV. Stream-line and Turbulent Flow. By
By C. V. Drysdale, D.Sc.(.ond.).
Professor A. II. Gibson, D.Sc.
Keaction
V Hydrodynamical Resistance. By Pro-
Projectiles. By F.
fessor A. H. Gibson, D.Sc.
Hunt, M.A., B.Sc.
Colour and Methods of Colour Reproduction. By L. C. Martin,
F.R.A.S., D.Sc., A.R.C.S., D.I.C. With chapters on Colour Print-
ing and Colour Photography by Wiliam Gamble, F.R.P.S.,
F.O.S.
. With 73 figures and 3 plates, z of which are in colour.
I25. 6d. net.
Optical Measuring Instruments. Their Construction, Theory, and
Use. By L. C. Martin, F.R.A.S., D.Sc., A.R.C.S., D.I.C.
With
172 figures. I7s. 6d. net.
Photography as a Scientific Implement. A Collective Work. With
258 figures. 3os. net.
C11. The History of Photography.
By
Vith. PhotomicrograplYon.r.f.r.s
George HI
Charles R. Gibson, F.R.S.E
Roman, M.D.,
II. The Elemontary
Optics
of Photo-
graphy.
By S. E. Shoppard, D.Sc.
IX. Photograph Warren Coot
III. Photographic
Optics.
Professor
D.S.O.
IV. The
1 They POtographic
Theory
&. Account Lendehotography:
By
cesses
iquacron-Leade
Laws,
D.B.E., F.R.I.S., R.A.I
Sheppard, D.Sc.(Lond.).
V. Astronomical Photography. By Charles
XI. Colour Photography. By W. J. F.
Kundle Davidson, F.K.A.S
Wastell, .R.l.s
VI. Application
Photography
in
XII. Photography as Applied to Printing.
Physics.
By
H.
Muss,
ID.Sc.
By William B. Ilistop.
(Lond.), A.R.C.S., D.I.C
XIII. The 'Technics of Kinematography.
VII. Photocranhy in the Engineerind and
By Arthur S. Newman.
Metallurgical Industries.
XIV. The
Camera as
Witness and De-
Henry G.
Chief
Resenreh
Laboratory
"Monypenn" Brown, Bayley's
tective.
By
Wilfred Mark
Well,
FI.S., F.R.M.S.
Steel Works, Ltd., Shellield.
Index.
Meteorology: An Introductory Treatise. By A. E. M. Geddes,
O.B.E., M.A., D.Sc. With 4 coloured plates, 16 half-tones, 103
figures, In charts, and 29 tables. 2Is. nct.
Electricity and its Practical Applications. A Textbook of Electrical
Engineering. By Magnus Maclean, D.Sc., II.D., F.R.S.E., M.I.E.E.
With 374 figures. Ios. Gdl. net.
Fuel and Refractory Materials. By A. Humboldt Sexton, F.I.C.,
F.C.S. Revised and enlarged by W. B. Davidson, D.Sc., Ph.I).,
F.I.C. With iI figures. Is. 6d. net.
[010 8]


===== PDF PAGE 0388 =====

Applied Physics
Applied Heat. Adapted from Der Wärmeingenieur, by Dipl.-Ing.
Julius Oelschläger, Chief Engineer, Wismar, Member of the Muni-
cipal Board of Works.
Under the Editorship of H. Moss, D.Sc.
(Lond.), A.R.C.S., D.I.C. With 270 figures, gos. net.
Tidal Lands. A Study of Shore Problems. By Alfred E. Carey,
M.Inst.C.E., and F. W. Oliver, F.R.S.
With 54 figures and 28
full-page illustrations.
I5s. net.
Applied Optics. The Computation of Optical Systems._ Translated
from the German of Dr. Adolph Steinhell and Dr. Ernest Voit.
By James
Weir French, D.Sc. (of Barr & Stroud). Two volumes.
30s. net.
Blackie's "Technique" Series
Preparation of Mirrors for Astronomical Telescopes. By George
McHardie. Illustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
An Introduction to Neon Lighting. By James Orr, M.I.E.S., and A.
W. Forrest, B.Sc. Fully illustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
Television. By M. G. Scroggie, B.Sc., A.M.1.E.E., Consulting Radio
Engineer.
Fully illustrated.
3s. 6d. net.
Sound-Film Reproduction. With Special Reference to British Practice.
By G. F. Jones, A.M.I.W.T. Illustrated. Second Edition. 3s. 6d. net.
Modern Miniature Cameras. By Robert M. Fanstone, A.R.P.S.
Fully illustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
Infra-red Photography. By S. O. Rawling, D.Sc., F.I.C., F.R.P.S.
Fully illustrated.
The Technique of Colour Photography. By Frank R. Newens,
F.R.P.S. Illustrated in Colour. Second Edition. 4s. 6d. net.
Spectroscopy in Science
and Industry. By S.
Judd Lewis,
D.Sc. (Lond.), D.Sc.(Tübingen), F.I.C., Ph.C., Consulting Spectro-
scopist and Analytical Chemist; Lecturer in Spectroscopy at the Sir
John Cass Technical Inst., London. Fully illustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
Steel and its Practical Applications. By William Barr, A.R.T.C.,
and A. J. K. Honeyman, B.Sc., A.R.T.C. Fully illustrated. 6s. net.
Practical Microscopy. By L. C. Martin, F.R.A.S., D.Sc., A.R.C.S.,
D.I.C., and B. K. Johnson, F.R.M.S. Fully illustrated. 3s. 6d. net.
Catalogue of Advanced Technical and Mathematical Books on application
BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
50 OLD BAILEY, LONDON, E.C.4 17 STANHOPE ST., GLASGOW, C.4
BLACKIE & SON (INDIA) LTD., WARWICK HOUSE, BOMBAY
BLACKIE & SON (CANADA) LTD., 55 YORK STREET, TORONTO, 2
[0164]
Printed in Great Britain by Blackie & Son, Ltd., Glasgowu


===== PDF PAGE 0389 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0390 =====

380
ATOMIC PHYSICS
tion thus occurs before the convergence limit of the hands, i.e., by longer
wave light than corresponds to the dissociation continuum.
As in the case of the phenomenon of preionization discussed on page
186, predissociation is caused by nonradiative transitions from quan-
tized energy states into a region of continuous energy, which in the
case of predissociation corresponds to that of the dissociated molecule.
To explain predissociation, Fig. 182 shows the potential curves and
vibration level diagrams of two excited molecular states.
We assume
that a transition from a lower state, not shown, to the state a' is possible.
a'
FIG. 182. Potential curves and corresponding vibration term sequences leucing to pre-
dissociation of & diatomic molecule.
Then in the absence of state b' we would observe a sequence of absorp-
tion bands which corresponds to transitions from a lower state to all a'
states beyond which, after the dissociation limit of a' is reached, the
dissociation continuum of a' follows. Now we consider the influence of
the disturbing molecular state b', whose dissociation energy lies belon
that of a'. If certain conditions (selection rules) between the electron
quantum numbers of d' and b' are fulfilled, there exists for the discrete
a' levels lying above the dissociation limit of l' the possibility of non-
radiative transitions (without gain or loss of energy) into the continuous
energy region of b'
', and thus of dissociation before the dissociation limit
of a' itself is reached. Since the Franck-Condon principle is valid also
for transition without emission or absorption of radiation, these transi-
tions from a' into the continuum of b' occur with high probability only
in the region of the intersection of a' and b', while for higher states the
probability of predissociation again decreases.
As in the case of preionization (page 186), the possibility of trunsitions
into the continuum implies a considerable reduction of the life-time of
the discrete states of a' and thus, according to the unvertainty rela-


===== PDF PAGE 0391 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
381
tion, an increase in the width of these energy states and the lines result-
ing from their combination. In the region of predissociation this line
width usually becomes so large that the different rotation lines of a band
merge into one another, thus accounting for the diffuse appearance of
the dissociation bands.
Predissociation is observed only in absorption,
because, as a result of the nonradiative transitions into the continuous
energy region, the radiation probability of predissociating states is ex-
tremely small.
For the photochemist this section contains some very important
results: Irradiation by those wavelengths which correspond to sharp absorp-
tion bands of the irradiated molecule produce excited, and thus reactive,
molecules.
Irradration by those wavelengths,
or the other hand, which
correspond to continuous absorption spectra or dilluse absorption bands
(which appear diffuse only because of the small dispersion of the spec-
troscope), produces dissociation of the irraciated molecules. Thus the
relation between the continuous absorption spectra of molecules and
their decomposition into atoms is explained.
c. The Processes of formation of Molecules from 1toms
What do we know about the reverse process, the formation of (di-
atomic) molecules from their atoms? In this case the situation is simila
to the combination of an ion and an clectron to form a neutral atom as
discussed on page 105. If two atoms which can form a molecule do col-
lide, they form a molecule only if the binding energy released in the
collision (which of course is numerically equal to the dissociation energy)
is somehow carried away. This can be done by a third atom. In that.
case we have the formation of a molecule in a triple collision of atoms
and can write the process as an equation,
i + B+6→ AB +Cut
(6-24)
We now consider whother this molecular recombination can also
occur if two atoms collide and the binding enorgy is emitteel as a photon.
In order to understand this problem correctly, we must first know the
difference between atomic (homopolar) and ionic Cheteropolar mol
cules. By atomic molecules we mean those which decompose into normal
atoms when dissociated in the ground slate (o.g., Us, 02, (1), etc).
lonic or heteropolar molecules, on the other hand, are those molecules
which (like Naci) dissociale from the ground slate into ions (Nat
and (i).
In the usual case of atomic molecules the colliding atoms A and B
"run along" the potential curve of the normal molecule (see Fig. 180).
The formation of a molecule, under mission of the binding every and the


===== PDF PAGE 0392 =====

382
ATOMIC PHYSICS
relative kinetic energies of A and B, is in this case just as impossible as
the reverse process, the optical dissociation without electron cacitation.
The reason is that transitions from the continuous energy region to the
vibrational ground state of the same electron state do not occur, because
their transition probability, according to the Franck-Condon principle,
is practically zero (Fig. 180). Two normal atoms which can form a
molecule thus cannot recombine in a two-particle collision, but only in
a triple collision in which the third partner, which can be the wall of
a glass tube, for example, takes over the excess energy.
The situation is different in the case of an ionic molecule (e.g., NaCI).
Here the colliding atoms are in a
A*+B different electron state (curve V'
ut
of Fig. 183) than the ground state
V" which is formed by two ions.
-A+B
Consequently, a recombination in
a two-particle collision is possible.
In this case, the radiation proba-
bility (and with it the recombina-
tion probability) is determined by
-Го
FIG. 183.
Set of potential curves for ex-
the probability of the electron
plaining the formation of an ionic molecule
transition 1B → A+B and by the
in a collision of two atoms upon emission of
the recombination continuum.
Franck-Condon principle. In the
case of the alkali halides, for ex-
ample, transitions to the normal ground state can occur, according to
the Franck-Condon principle, from the reversal points between I and
G' of the colliding normal atoms A and B. In this case the energy is
radiated away as un emission continuum whose wavelength limits are
given by the transition wrows F'f" and G""', so that we have the
two-particle collision recombination process
1+8→1+3 + here
(6-25)
Consequently, just as photodissociation under continuous absorption is
possible only il there is a simultancous change of the electron confiyura-
tion, the formation of molecules in a two-particle collision under continuous
emission of the binding and kinetic energies ocears only if there is a simul
taneous change in the electron configuration. Such an electron trunsition
is also connected with the radiative recombination of normal and
excited atoms in two-particle collisions, according to the equation
A + B* → 1B + hove
(6-26)
In a highly dissociated and excited gas, for example in a discharge
plasma, collisions between normal and excited atoms are sufficiently
frequent. These take place "along" the curve of the excited molecular


===== PDF PAGE 0393 =====

38:3
MOLECULAR PHYSICS
state, Fig. 181. As in the case mentioned above, in collisions the kinetir
energy of the colliding atoms is converted into potential encigs to that
a point above the dissociation limit on the left side of the: potential
curve is reached. By transitions from this branch of the: potential
curve of the excited molecule to the ground state, the collidiris aloms I
and B* recombine under emission of continuous radiation.
Thus, the observation of such emission continua of molecules fur
the preadite cor the ross of radiative recombination it i
colliding atoms. Emission continua, which correspond toe the recom-
bination proress (6-25), are found especially in the case of alkali-halin
vapors, whereas continua corresponding to radiative recombination
(6-26) have been observed for the halogens and tellurium.
6-7. Limitations of the Molecule Concept. Van der Waals
Molecules and Collision Pairs
We have so far used the torm "molecule" i if it were a seolf-evident
concept, but now we must refine our knowledge and proceed too a higher
point, of view. By a molecule wo usually mean, without giving it l
much consideration, a system of two or more doms or group es of alons
whose potential energy for a definite noler configuration is if i mi.
mum, and which is, to a certain extent, independent of its end direment.
The latter means that Cat least at the instant of Observations o
the inder-
action within the system is great compared to that between
and its onvironmont. Physically such a molecule is, de
see burn.
characterized by the fores acting between the atoms, ie, beg the change
of potential with the internuclear distance (potential curved arad his the
value of its total enorgy. The enorgy is measured upwared piti
from the ground state of the normal molecule or lass we dee here from
the zero point of the free atoms. In this case the binding cane ray of th
stable molecular states is negative, whereas the kindi energy of the tre.
dissociaded slades of the molecule is positive.
We now can distinguish between three types of molecules, cle pee moling on
the shape of their potential carves, ie, their binding forces clear part
of Vig. 181). We consider first the normal, strongly bound
Which were almost exclusively treated in the lastsections. Their char
teristic foatures are a pronouneed potential minimum at at colatioly
small internuclear distance (re 1A), and a relatively luge elicsintron
energy of 1 t05eo Clig. 181, Curve a). The second type ost
molerale
is called a "van dor Waals molecule" for reasons which will booms
«lear below. 1l is chareterized by the potential curve be it lo a hallos
minimum it large internaclear distance Coe 3 to 5A), duel leg a mally


===== PDF PAGE 0394 =====

384
ATOMIC PHYSICS
very small dissociation energy (order of magnitude of 0.01 to 0.1 ev in
the ground state). These molecules consist of atoms which are not able
to form & normal, strongly bound molecule by rearranging their electron
shells. However, there exists between them some attraction due to
mutual polarization and related interaction forces of the second order.
These second-order forces imply a possibility of formation of loosely
bound molecules. The same types of interatomic and intermolecular
attractive forces which produce these weak honds are also responsible
54
3
2
b"
a"
Fid. 184. Potential-curve diagram for the electron ground state and un exeited cloctron
stato of a diatomic molecule with transitions indicating all possible discrete and continuous
molecular spectra.
for the deviations in the behavior of a real from an ideal gas. Since
these deviations are described by the van der Waals equation of state,
we call those molecules which are bound by these forces van der Waals
molecules. Now if we consider as the third type of molecule an atomic
system which is characterized by the potential curve c, we see that this
differs from a van der Waals molecule only in that it cannot have
negative energy values at all. The repulsive forces always execed the
attractive forces; in every other respect such a system of atoms bchaves
just as an arbitrary real molecule in a free state of positive energy.
It is represented by two atoms in the instant of the collision, if only repul-
sive forces act between them. Such a system is called a collision pair. We
introduce it here as the limiting case of the molecule, although it larks
i potential minimum and thus does not fit the customary definition of
¿ molecule given above. Evidently a sharp line cannot be drawn be-
tween the van der Waals molecule and the collision pair. Furthermore,


===== PDF PAGE 0395 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
385
& collision pair can emit and absorb spectra just as other molecules.
Finally, a pure repulsive potential curve characterizing & collision pair
occasionally also occurs in the case of excited states of regular mule-
cules, as we know, for instance, from Fig. 119.
The best known example of a van der Waals type molecule is the
'Ily
6'5+7'P,
8
'st
6'5+7'5
32g?
6'5+735
7
-'My
6'S+6'P,
6
'Шо",
6'5+63р
З1u
5
6'5+63р,
35t
Volts
6'5+63рo
30,
2
No 12 Nr. 12-
No. 30.4
No. 1.
No. 2-
• No.9
•No. 8
No.10
No.13
's'g
6'5+6'5
r
Pid. 185. Potential-curvo dingrom of the lge vent dor Wads molocale, dotermined from
the study of the ditture bands and continua. OBy Wreconshi and the author. )
Ilge molecule consisting of two llg atoms. All types of binding which
we have mentioned above oceur among its excited energy states.
Figure 185 shows its potential curve diagram which is the produet of
many years of patient rescarch of a large number of investigators. The
Hee molecule consisting of too holium alons, whose existence was
established spectroscopically, is another example of a van der Waals
molecule, but only in the ground state. Pronounced potential minima
are characteristic for the excited states of Hey and give rise to the emis
sion of numerous le bands, which were analyzed, especially by Weizol.
By transitions from these stable excited states to the unstable ground
state, an emission continuum lying in the far ultraviolet is emitted.


===== PDF PAGE 0396 =====

386
ATOMIC PHYSICS
A noticeable van der Waals attraction also exists between two O
molecules and, according to an investigation of the author, is responsible
for the existence of the double molecule 02-02 = (02)2. It consists of
two normal oxygen molecules and, besides other spectra, absorbs the
continuous bands which are responsible for the blue color of compressed
as well as liquid oxygen.
Van der Waals forces, whose potential corresponds to curve b in Fig.
184, play an important role in other phenomena also. We mention here
only the large number of cohesion and adhesion phenomena which are
produced by them, as well as the secondary forecs by which smaller
and larger molecules are bound together in certain crystals and colloidal
micelles which play an important role in biology. They also are, at least
partly, responsible for the process of polymerization of gigantic molecular
complexes from single molecules (e.g., the caoutchou molecule from
about 2,000 isoprene molecules). We point out, finally, that the loose
binding of two molecules effected by such van der Waals forces seems
to be important for the initial stage of many chemical reactions, because
it is often a prerequisite for a sufficiently intense interaction of the
molecules. The often very casual treatment of the van der Wauls forces
and the spectra resulting from them (also the variation of an atomie
spectrum by the van der Waals binding of the atom to a large complex,
such as a crystal or a wall) does not seem to be justified, since a careful
investigation of these phenomena may produce many interesting results.
After this extension of our knowledge about the concopt of molecules
and the potential curves of the different types of molecules, we return
to the discrete as well as continuous spectra which result from the shupe
and mutual positions of the potential curves of the combining molecular
states and, conversely, can be used to determine them. For this purpose
we consider the schematic diagrum Fig. 184 in which are shown as tsymp-
totes to the right the two families of curves of the ground state and an
excited state of an atom. The potential curves originate from bringing
an additional normal atom into interaction with the first one, this be-
ing in its different states. The different possible types of transitions
are represented by arows. However, we have to consider that the
transitions naturally occur also from all neighboring points of the poten-
tial curve under consideration.
Whereas the transition number 1 between the undisturbed atomic
states produces a sharp spectral line, a broadened atomic line results
from transition number 2. It is erident that the amount and chareter
of the broadening depends upon the average interatomic distance
(function of the density of the gas), on the temperature, and the shape
of the two potential curves. With these few remarks, we have consid-


===== PDF PAGE 0397 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
387
ered the process of collision broadening, already discussed on page 187,
from an entirely new point of view.
We considered the emitting or
absorbing and the colliding atom together as a molecule (or collision
pair) and thus conceived of collision broadening as a limiting case of a
molccular spectrum. It is now evident that it is only a small step from
the simple broadened atomic line to the spectra of the weakly bound
van der Waals molecule represented by transitions 3 and 4. They
consist of narrow continuous or apparently continuous bands which are
closcly related to the corresponding atomic line (trunsition number 1).
The emission and absorption of mercury vapor at pressures which are
not too low provide numerous examples of this type of hand associated
with atomic lines. We have already referred to the identification of
there bands as spectra of a llge van der Waal molecule. The trunsitions
5 to 8 occur in the region of nuclear separation in which the electron
clouds of the two atoms ponetrate cach other considerably and thus
cause major changes of the energy compared to the unperturbed atomic
states. They represent, therefore, molecular spoetra in the more re-
stricted and customary sonde.
Whereas the normal clectron band
spectra correspond to transitions & betwren the discrete sates of both
potential curves, there exists an extended emission continuum due to
transition 5 from the minimum of an cxcited molcoular state to the
repulsion curve of a lover state. The best known examples of this ar
the continuum of the helium molecule in the extrome ultraviolet, which
was mentioned on page 77, and the hydrogen molecular continuum
extending from the groon to the far altarioled. The ladder is omitted
ly any glow discharge in dry hydrogen at sevoral millimete pressure.
In conclusion, transition 7 from the discrete dates of the lower potential
curve to the continmous enorgy rogion of an upper curve accounts for an
extended absorption continuum. The best known examples for this ac
the absorption continua of the halogon mokerules lo, Big Clo, 1Br, elr.,
which lie in the visible or noar ultrariolet.
This discussion reveals how many important conclusions with respect
to emission and absorption spootre can he drawn from the potential
curve diagram. a 11 is worth whie, therefore, to become thoroughly
familiar with the concopl of the potential curve and its consequoness.
6-8. Molecular Rotation and the Determination of Moments of
Inertia and Internuclear Distances from the Rotation
Structure of the Spectra of Diatomic Molecules
After we have become acquainted with the numerous phenomena
which are rolated to molecular vibration and dissociation, we shall
discuss now molecular rotation and the conclusions which may be


===== PDF PAGE 0398 =====

338
ATOMIC PHYSICS
drawn from investigations of the rotational phenomena in molecular
spectra.
a. Rotation Term Diagrams and Infrared Rotation Spectra
The simplest model of the rigid molecule rotating about the axis
of greatest moment of inertia, the rotator with free axis, was discussed
ware-mechanically on page 218. We found there that only the following
sequence of discrete energy values is possible for the
30.
rotator:
Erot = hcBJ(J + 1)
J = 0,1,2, ...
(6-27)
where
20 -
h
B = 87°cl
(6-28)
is the rotation constant and
12.
I = 172 =
mime
(6-29)
mI + 712
6
again is the moment of inertia of the molecule about
the axis of rotation. J is the rotation quantum number
belonging to the total angular momentum Jof the rotat-
FIG. 186. Possible
transitions in the
ing molecule.
rotation-level dia-
The rotation term diagrum shown in Fig. 186 fol-
gram of the elec-
tron and vibration
lows from (6-27). For optical transitions between
ground state of &
these rotation states the selcetion rule
diatomic molecule
(rotation band).
AJ = +1
(6-30)
which follows from the correspondence principle (page 164) or from
wave mechanics, applies. Thus each rotation state en combine undor
emission or absorption of radiation only with its two neighboring stales.
From this selection rule and Fig. 186 it follows that the rolation spec-
trum of & diatomic molecule lying in the far infrared consists of a
sequence of equidistant spectral lines (rotation lines) with the wave
numbers 2B, 4B, 6B, . . . .
The distance between two consecutive
lines thus should he 2B. Pure rotation spectra in good agreement with
this theory were first found by Czerny in the case of the HICh molecule.
Just as in the case of the vibration spectrum (paye 3169), the rotation spectrum
can be observed only if a change of the electric moment is associated with
the rotation (dipole radiation). Thus the centers of the clectric charges
must not coincide with the center of mass. This condition is fulfilled onl!
for the unsymmetrical molecules such as HI, but not for 1lz, (1e, 0)2, Cle.
C'onsequently, the latter do not have casily ubservable rotation or rolation
vibration bands.


===== PDF PAGE 0399 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
389
If the rotation spectrum is observable, then the rotation constant B
can be taken from it immediately. The moment of inertia of the
molecule, and thus one of the most important molecular constants,
can be computed from B according to Eq. (6-28). Moreover, if the
masses mi and me of the constituent atoms of a molecule are known
(and this will always be the case if we know the molecule responsible
for the spectrum), then the internuclear distance of the molecule
follows immediately from the moment of inertia by means of Eq. (6-29).
The internuclear distances determined in this way are within the order
of magnitude of 1 A, which is in agreement with our knowledge of the
dimensions of atoms and molecules. Table 14 presents the most impor-
tant data for a number of diatomic molecules, as determined from their
spectra. If the rotation and vibration are optically inactive, as in the
case of molecules consisting of identical atoms, then B, and with it
I and ro, can he determined, though not quite as casily, from the rota-
tional structure of the electronic bands, or from the rotational Raman
effect, page 352.
Table 14. Internuclear Distances, Moments of Inertia, Furlamental Vibralional
Quanta, aul Dissocialion Energies of Some Important Molecules in the Ground Stute
Internuclear
Moment of
Fundamental
Dissociation energy
Molecule
distance,
inertia 1,
vibrational
ro 1
10-10 gm en
quantum, cm-
Mlectron volt
keal/mole
Il2
0.77
0.17
13:0
1.16
103
1.20
19.1
1580
5.09
118
1.09
13.X
2:360
7.35
170
1.60
67.7
727
1.15
103
1.08
113.5
565
2.17
57
2.28
3.12
32•1
1.96
.15
2.66
T.11
21•1
1.53
35
1.13
15.0
2169
9.67
2207
1.15
16.3
1907
5.3
122
NIC!
1.27
2.60
2080)
1.10
102
6. The Rotation l'ibration Spectrum
From the discussion of the pure rotation spectrum we proceed to
the rotation vibration spectrum which is produced by changes in the
rotational and vibrational states of the molecule (without a change in
the configuration of the electrons). Two sequences of rotational terms,
belonging to the vibration levels a = 0 and " = 1, are shown in Fig. 187.
Corresponding to the scloction rule (6-30), the resulting rolation vibration
band consists of two "brnches" which bolong to the transitions
AJ = +1 and AJ =-1. They are shown to the left and right in


===== PDF PAGE 0400 =====

390
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Fig. 187. The line sequence belonging to AJ = +1 extends from the
zero line (not shown) toward shorter wavelengths and is called the
positive or R branch. The sequence belonging to AJ = - 1 extends
toward the longer wavelengths and is called the negative or P branch.
If we assume as a rough approximation that the
moment of inertia of the molccule is the same for
the upper as for the lower vibrational state in spitc
of the difference in vibration, then the separations
- 3
of the rotation levels are equal in both vibration
2
states. This case is presented in Fig. 187. Then
once more we have equidistant lines separated by
val.
•0
the constant distance 2B (Fig. 188). The zero
-4
line, which cannot appear hecause the transition
AJ = 0 is forbidden, can be casily determined.
•3
Its frequency gives the energy of the pure vibra
tional transition. For every vibrational transition
-2
- /
which is possible according to Figs. 177 and 178,
V=0
we expect a hand of the kind described. This
FIG. 187.
Energy-level
diagram
for explaining
corresponds roughly to the spectroscopie results.
&
rotation
vibration
A small deviation from the assumed constancy of
band
of
a diatomir
molecule.
the distances between consecutive lines, however,
is evidence that, first, the moment of inertie is
not constant and independent of the vibrational state and that, second,
the rotation and vibration of the molecule are not indepondent. The
energy values of the pure rotation and vibration thus cannot simply
be added, but the interaction of vibration and rotation must be taken
into account by introducing a mixed term containing o and I in the
* 2B-
- 2B-
- 48--
*-2B -
- 2B
Vo
FIG. 188. Schematic representation of a rotation vibration band.
expression for the molecular energy. If this is done, complete agree
ment between theory and spectroscopie results is achieved.
c. The Rotation Structure of Normal Electron Bands
We now take up the most complicated case, that of bund spectra
resulting from simultaneous changes in the electron configuration,
vibration, and rotation of a molecule. These bands oceur in the visible
and ultraviolet spectral regions. As a result of the participation of an


===== PDF PAGE 0401 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
391
electron transition in the absorption and emission, there is always a
change in the electric moment of the molecule. Electron band spectra
thus are emitted and absorbed also by symmetrical molecules such
as H2, Oa, etc. These electron transitions also make it possible for transi-
tions (except for the S → I transitions, see below) to occur without a
change in the rotational quantum number. Thus, instead of (6-30),
the rotational selection rule for electron band spectra is
AJ = 0 or +1
(6-31)
with the limitation that transitions between states with zero rotation
(0+> 0) are forbidden since there is no change of the electric moment
connected with them. Consequently, &
zero or @ branch for AJ = 0 is to be
acded to the branches of a band cor-
responding to AJ = 1 (positive or R
3
branch and negative or l branch). The
отл
zero branch can now appear, because
the electron transition causes a change
of the electric moment, even without a
J"
5-
change of the rotational state of the
molecule. On the other hand, no change
4
in the clectron configuration is connected
3
with a 2 - @transition (page 361); con-
2
sequently no zero branch can appear in
this case, because now the dectric mo
lia. 18!.
Transitions botwoon the
ment of the molecule cannot change
rotation dorm soquence of two dif-
feront, electron atalow of a dintomic
without a change of the rotational state.
molecule.
This explaine the 1', Q.
We know fromithe discussion of the
and K branch normally presont. in
potential curves that the intornooler
i haund connoctor with an dectron
transition.
distanee, the moment of inertid, and
the binding forees of a molecule may be greatly changed by an electron
transition.
In goneral, therefore, the sequenee of the vibration states is
woll as that of the rotational states are difterent. in the upper and lower
electron states. Accordingly, two different rolational term sequences d
shown in Fig. 180, which may be thought of as belonging to any tvo vi-
bration levels of any too different electron states. The onorgy difference
of the two zero-rotation lovels is the wave number of the zero line (for-
bidden), for which the vibration formula (6-20) applies. It is equal te
the sum of the cootron and vibration transitionse —y" and is written
Fle,""). The individual rotational lines of a band are designated, its in
Pig. 180, by the d number of the lower state CO"). Thus the R(3) line
of a band is the transition d'J" = 44→3. From la. (6-27) we


===== PDF PAGE 0402 =====

392
ATOMIC PHYSICS
have the formula for the wave numbers of the rotational lines of a band
È=È(U',") + BuJ'(J' + 1) - BuJ" (J" + 1)
(6-32)
in which, from the selection rule (6-31), J" must be equal to J' or J' # 1.
These three possible changes in the rotational quantum numbers cor-
respond to the three branches of a band,
(J" - 1 P branch
Q branch
(6-33)
(J" + 1 R branch
which are shown in Fig. 189.
The best representation of the structure of an electron band as deter-
J
25
20
15
10
5
FiG. 190. Fortrat diagram of a band with three branches. Bolow is the whole spectral
hand originating from the superposition of the lines of the three branches. (Afler Formi.)
mined by (6-32) and (6-33) is its so-called Fortrat dingrum. If, is in
Fig. 190, the wave numbers of the band lines in reciprocal contimeters or
wavelengths are plotted on the abscissa, and the rotational quantum
numbers J" are plotted on the ordinate, the result is a parabola for cach
of the three branches of the band. This can be casily ascertained by
measuring the trunsition arrows in Fig. 189. The Fortrat diagrum thus
provides a means of separating the lines of the different, branches and
rotational quantum numbers which, in the observed spectrum, appeur


===== PDF PAGE 0403 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
393
mixed in a confusing way. Conversely, we can get from the Fortrat
diagram a picture of the spectrum (in wave numbers) by projecting on
the i axis (abscissa) the points in the diagram corresponding to the differ-
ent lines. This has been done in Fig. 190, where the picture of the whole
band is shown underneath the diagram. It is especially clear from the
liagram that the hand edge is actually not due to a convergence of the
band lines, as is the series limit in an atomic spectrum (page 80), but
is a more or less accidental phenomenon. It depends, just as the interval
between it and the physically significant zero line (for the pure electron
J
11-
10
R
6
5
3
2
Fra. 191. Portent disgram of a lnd without edge, cue to idontical internuclour distanoos
in the upper and lower doctron state. Calfler W'rizel.)
and vibration trunsition), on the intervals between the rotation levels
of the upper and lower slates. If the A brunch forms an edge, is in
our big. 192, we say that the band is shaded loward the violet; in the case
of an edge formed by the k branch (Wig. 190) it is shouled toward the red.
It follows from the relation betweon the Portrad diagram and the transi-
tions in the torm diagrum that the shading dopends on whether the
internuclear distanee (and with it the moment. of inertia) is greater or
smaller in the upper state than it is in the lower. We thus have the
following rolations:
Red-shacked band (Redge): ro > r";!'>1";B'<B"1
(6-34)
Violet-shader band (A cage): ro < r"; l' < 1"; B' > B".
For equal values of internuclear distances and moments of inertia in
the two combining states, we have no edge structure and the @ branch
shrinks together to form a single line as shown approximately in lig, 191
which is in example of an actually measured band.
Thus a shorl glane al a band spectrom just lo see the shading of the
bands allows as lo draw important conclusions aboul the combining molecu-
lar slates, whereas an creed analysis provides as with the absolude values of
the rolation conslants, moments of inortia, and internuclar distances.


===== PDF PAGE 0404 =====

394
ATOMIC PHYSICS
d. The Influence of Electron Transitions on the Rotation Structure
In our treatment of the rotation structure of the electron bands we
have not, so far, considered the fact that the total momentum J of
the molecule which controls the spacing of the rotation terms results
from the vectorial addition of the angular momentum of the rotating
nuclei and an angular momentum which itself is composed, according
to page 361, of the angular momentum of the electron shells about the
internuclear axis A, and the resultant spin S. These relationships
become especially complicated by the fact that the rotation of the whole
molecule produces a new magnetic field which competes, with respect
to the orientation of the spin of the electron shell, with the field in the
direction of the internuclear axis. Therefore, the coupling between the
angular momenta of the molecular rotation K, of the resulting orbital
momentum in the direction of the internuclear axis A, and of the result-
ant spin of the electron shells, S, changes with increasing rotation,
depending on the strength of the internuclear field. The different
possible cases of coupling for this interaction of electronic motion and
rotation have been analyzed, especially by Hund. These dilferent cases
of coupling cause differences in the rotation structure of the electron
bands, such as the failure of the appearance of the zero line und of
certain neighboring lines, as well as deviations from the parabolic branch
curves in the Fortrat diagram. We must pass over all these details of
the band structure and can only mention that, as a result of the higher
multiplicity of many-electron molecules, multiple brunches of bunds
can also appear. An investigation of all these details, however, is of
interest because it permits us to determine empirically the quantum
numbers A or & of the electron configuration in the upper and lower
states. The complete band analysis thus provides all possible state-
ments about a molecule. The consistent agreement of even the finest
details of the often very complicated spectra with the theory is the
best proof for the correctness of our theoretical concept of the molecules
and their behavior.
e. The Influence of Nuclear Spin on the Rolation Sructure
of Symmetrical Molecules. Ortho and Parahydrogen.
In conclusion we shall briefly consider the influence of the nuclear
spin on the rotation structure of diatomic molecules with identical
nuclei (homonuclear molecules), upon which an interesting ellect, es-
pecially in the case of molecular hydrogen, depends. We saw (pages 1:34
and 233) in discussing the He atom and the Fe molecule that, because
of the exchange possibility of the two identical electrons, considering


===== PDF PAGE 0405 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
395
also their electron spin, the term diagrams of these two-electron systems
split up into to term systems, a singlet system and triplet system, which
do not intercombine. In the case of He and the other molecules consisting
uf ulertical atoms we now have, in addition to the possibility of exchange
of clectrons, the exchange possibility of the identical nuclei. This again
causes, according to the formalism described on page 233, the existence of
two term systems which do not combine with each other. The wave-mechan-
ical treatment showed that the rotation terms (in the electron singlet
system as in the electron triplet system of Ha) belong alternatingly to
one and to the other of the two term systems which in this case are called
even and odd. In the case uf Ha, page 208, we have two nuclear spin
moments each of z(h/2m), which can have the sume direction (analogous
to the triplet system) or opposite directions (analogous to the singlet
system). Because of the small interaction between the nuclear spin and
the motion of the molecule, the rotation terms which belong to the three
possible orientations of the parallel spin moments do not split up. The
even and old terms thus can be distinguished only by their statistical
weight, ie, the rotation band lines corresponding to them are dis-
tinguished by their different, intensities (in this case 1:3). Actually, is
was first found by Mecke, the bond spectra of all molecules formed from
identical atoms (but, for example, not that of the slightly unsymmetrical
N'N" molecules) show these alernating intensiles of consecutive band
lines which depend on the nuclear spin. In agreement with the theory,
the intensity ratio in the case of Ile is 1:3.
• This agreement of theory
and experiment, and the resulting possibility of determining the spin
momentum of the nuclei of molecules from measurements in band
spectra, which supplement in a welcome way the nuclear spin deter-
minations by magnetic methods (page 208) and by hyperfine structure
studies in atomie spectro, is an excollent example of the interrelationship
of the various fields of atomic physics.
In the case of the hydrogen molecule, whose rolation states are widely
separated berause of its small moment of inertin, the existence of the
two rotation torm systems which do not combine with one another leas
to an interesting alteel. Because this cleet is in contradiction to the
clusical theory, it can be regarded as another proof for the correctness
of quantum physics. By continuously decreeing the temperature,
not all Me mokerules ean gracually enter the rotationless slate d = 0,
ins is expected classically. Only the molecules with parallel nudear spin
can enter this state while those with antiparallel spin, because of the
Pauli principle, must remain in the next. higher, of = 1, state, which
cannot combine with the d =o state, regadless of how much we try
to cool down the hydrogen. This feet becomes evident in a well-known


===== PDF PAGE 0406 =====

396
ATOMIC PHYSICS
anomaly of the specific heat of hydrogen at low temperatures. Thus
molecular hydrogen behaves as if it consisted of two different modifica-
tions which Bonhoeffer and Harteck called ortho- and parahydrogen.
It must be realized, however, that in contrast to the phenomenon of
helium, which depends on the effect of the electron spin, the difference
between ortho- and parahydrogen depends on the nuclear spin of the
atoms which form the molecule, or, more accurately, on the exchange
possibility of the two identical nuclei. A transformation of ortho-
hydrogen (antiparallel nuclear spin momenta, J = 1, 3, 5, . . • ) into
parahydrogen (parallel nuclear spin momenta, J = 0, 2, 4, . . .)
would require & change of the direction of one of the nuclear spin
moments, which normally is as forbidden for nuclei as it is for electrons
(page 147). By special treatment of He under high pressure and by
adsorption to cooled charcoal, Bonhueffer and Harterk and, independ-
ently, Eucken and Hiller were able to produce pure parhydrogen.
They found, as was expected, that the rotation lines corresponding to
J = 1, 3, 5, . . . were then missing.
6-9. Band Intensities and Temperature Determination by
Band Spectroscopy
Now that we have learned about the structure of the spectra of dia-
tomic molecules and its relation to molecular constitution, we shall
briefly consider the problem of the intensity of bund spectra. This is
important, first, because line structure and intensity distribution are
necessary to give a complete description of a spectrum and, second,
because the measurement of the intensity distribution in bund spectra
has led to the development of an important method for determining
high temperatures.
According to page 166, the intensity of a spectrum is determined by
the transition probability between the two combining states, and by
the number of molecules occupying the initial state of the transition in
question, its so-called occupation number. The trunsition probability,
and with it the intensity of the entire band system, is determined by
the probability of the electron transitions, computed according to page
216. The transition probability for the individual bands, on the other
hand, follows from the Franck-Condon principle (page 370). Within
each branch of a hand, finally, the transition probability is constant,
whereas the relative intensity of the different branches can be computed
from J and the electron quantum numbers according to formulas of
Hönl and London. A definite statement. about the occupation number
of the initial state can be made from Maxwell's distribution law, but
only for the case of thermal equilibrium, i.e., in general for the absorption


===== PDF PAGE 0407 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
397
of molecules. For the case of emission, on the other hand, a statement
can be made only if the excitation is due exclusively to the thermal
velocity. For the intensity of a spectral line resulting from a transition
between states of energies El and Ea we have
1 Es = C1,291e-E4/kT
(6-35)
where Ci, is & constant containing the transition probability between
states 1 and 2, g1 is the statistical weight of state E, (see page 166),
and T is the ahsolute temperature of the absorbing or emitting molecules,
i.e., of the initial state.
R
114. 192. Intensitv distribution in the three branches of a normal band. (Afer Jerons.)
From the general formula (6-35) we obtain the intensity distribution
in a rotation band if we substitute for Ey the rolation energy
11 = hcB.J (d + 1)
(6-36)
and for di the slatistical weight of a rotation state
1/1 =21 + 1
(6-37)
Pquation (6-37) follows from the fact that coch rotational state in a
dinomic molecule is 2.1-fold degenerate as a result of the equal influenee
of the two rotation axes which are perpendicular to the nuclear axis.
With this we have
he l3./ (J.+1)
11 = 1(2.1 + 1)
(6-38)
Equation (6-38) describes the intonsities of the rotation lines of a band
as & function of the d values of the initial state. Figure 192 shows the
intensity distribution of the rotation lines of a band computed according
to (6-38). The intensity of a line is here represented by its length.
According to (6-38) the intensity distribution in a band is lompera-
ture-dependent. Thus by measuring the maximum of the intensity
in a branch of the band, ie, the & value of the line of highest intensity,
the temperature of the emitting or absorbing gas can be determined.
This method has been applied successfully in measuring the comperatures
in clectric ares, especially in the outer gones. However, in discharges


===== PDF PAGE 0408 =====

398
ATOMIC PHYSICS
resulting from nonthermal exciting collisions, Eq. (6-38) is not. ap-
plicable, and attempts to apply it lead to gross errors. Furthermore,
by collisions of the second kind with energy exchange (page 10t), the
occupation of rotation states can be greatly changed, so that all con-
ditions must be carefully checked before band-speetroscopic temperature
measurements can be considered reliable.
If the condition of thermal equilibrium is fulfilled, then the sume
method deseribed above can be used to compute how, at a given tem-
perature, molecules are distributed among the vibration states of the
initial electronic state. By applying the Franck-Condon principle,
page 370, the intensity distribution of the bands within a band system
then can be determined. In this case we have to substitute in (6-35)
E1 = hcw(v + ⅔)
(6-39)
Since the vibration states of diatomic molecules are not degencrate,
the statistical weight of all vibration states is unity. Thus we have
(63-40))
Because of the difficulty of numerically computing the transition
probability contained in C' according to the F'rand-Condon principle,
Eq. (6-40) is less suited for the absolute determination of temperature
from the relative intensities of the different bands of a system. However,
the determination of changes of the temperature from the corresponding
changes of the relative intensities of the various bands is easily possible,
since in this case (' remains constant. This vibration method has
already been used with success in investigating temporatures, especially
of electric ares, and we may be certain that both methods of measuring
temperatures by band spectroscopy will be further developed and will
play an important role in the development of the physies of high
temperatures.
6-10. Isotope Measurement by Means of Molecular Spectra
We have already mentioned in the discussion of the phenomonon of
isotopes that the detection of isotopes as well as the determination of
their masses and relative abundances is possible by optical sportro-
scopic methods just as by mass-spectroscopie methods.
We have
treated on page 181 the influence of isotopes on the hypertine structur
of line spectra; now we shall discuss briefly the isotope efieet on baund
spectra.
Since the different isotopes of an atom differ only in their missor,
the incorporation of different isotopes in the same molecule (o.g.,
LiH and LiH) affects the hand spectra through the corresponding


===== PDF PAGE 0409 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
399
change in the moment of inertia (6-29) of the molecule. According
to Eqs. (6-27) and (6-28), the separation of the rotational levels is
inversely proportional to the moment of inertia I of the molecule, while
acording to Eqs. (6-11) and (6-12) the spacing of the vibration levels
is inversely proportional to the square root of the moment of inertia I.
The results of these two mass influences on the spectra are the rotational
and the vibrational isotope effect.
We now consider too diatomic molecules, one of which may have
the atomic masses me and ind; in the second molecule the mass my
m
15.5
oi co
6
5
5
.5
.5
MN-
0
Vo
1a. 193. Rotational intoge offert in an olocton band. The branches belonging to the
1uo inotogio molonlon are indicaded an molid dund dotted curren, ragedively. aflor
Weche.)
is replaced by the mass of an isolopo, met am. In computing, by
means of the formulas on page 388 for the rotation, the wave-number
differoner of two coqual rotation lines of these tore molecules, we find
1o All
(6-11)
where d, is the wade mumber distance of the rotation line from the
soro limo of the band. From the vibration formulas on page 365 we
lind, for the wade number difference of doe bend edges of the iro
isolopio molecules, the formula.
11lo AM
(6-42)
in which to is the distaner of the band oolge under consideration from
1he 10,09 band of the band sestem. Figure 193 shows the rotationl
isolope ollord ropesonted in a Portral dingram.
Equations 1-110 and 16-12) show that the isotopie splitting of the
lines increases linearly with the distones from the zoro line or the (0,0)


===== PDF PAGE 0410 =====

400
ATOMIC PHYSICS
band, respectively. By measuring the spacings Ai, or Av, and the dis-
tances i, or Is, respectively, the mass ratio mi/(ms + Am) of the iso-
topic atoms in the molecule can thus be determined. Because of the
high accuracy of spectroscopic wavelength measurements this method
of determining isotope masses is very accurate. By measuring the in-
tensity ratios of the lines belonging to the isotopic molecules, the ratio
of the two kinds of molecules, and thus the relative abundance of the
isotopic atoms in the molecule, can be determined very accurately.
By means of this isotope effect in band spectra, new isotopes of the
elements C, N, and O were discovered for the first time. A large number
of isotopes were confirmed after they had been detected by mass-
spectroscopic experiments. Mass ratios and relative abundances have
been measured for many new isotopes. Mass-spectroscopic, line-
spectroscopic, and band-spectroscopic isotope methods thus supplement
each other very nicely.
6-11. Survey of the Spectra and Structure of Polyatomic Molecules
The results of molecular research deduced from diatomic molecules
as they have been presented in this chapter can be applied, at least
in their fundamentals, to polyatomie molecules. However, because
of the large number of possibilities for excitation and ionization, for
vibration and dissociation, as well as for the rotation about the three
axes associated with the different principal moments of inertia, the
spectra of these molecules are very complicated. A complete analysis
of the electronic, vibrational, and rotational structure, and the cor-
responding complete knowledge of all molecular data, therefore, is
available only for some simpler polyatomie molecules (such as 110)
and CU2); in most cuses we have to be content with incomplete infor-
mation.
Therefore, we shall not discuss in all detail the clectronic,
vibrational, and rotational structures of polyatomie molecules, but shall
limit ourselves to a survey of the more important phenomena which are
typical of such molecules.
a. Electron Excitation and Ionization of Polyatomic Molculi's
The systematics of the electron states of polyatomic molecules is
closely related to that of diatomic molecules (page 359). It has been
alvanced especially by Mulliken in the last 10 years. The dillerence
compared to diatomic molecules consists, in the first place, in the larger
number of external electrons which can be excited and ionized. In the
second place, these electrons, depending on their location in the molecule,
play different roles in holding the molecule together. We may distin-
guish three extreme cases of this behavior.


===== PDF PAGE 0411 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
101
In many molecules the near ultraviolet absorption is due to electrons
which are responsible also for holding the molecule together. For this
reason they are called binding electrons. Their excitation often reduces
the binding to such an extent, (analogous to the case of the diatomic
molecule, Fig. 169, page 364) that immediate dissociation into two
atom groups results. According to page 377, the corresponding absorp-
tion spectrum must then be continuous.
This photodissociation,
caused by the absorption of radiation by binding clectrons, explains why
the ultraviolet absorption spectrum of so many polyatomic molecules
is continuous. An interjection is necessary at this point. ()ne must be
careful to distinguish, in the case of polyatomie molecules, between
genuinely continuous and nongenuine quasi-continuous spectra.
The
latter are actually discrete band spectra. The reason for this is the
following: Since the distaner between the band lines according to
page 388 is inversely proportional to the moment of inertia of the mole-
cule, in polyatomie molecules with large moments of inertia the distance
between the hand lines is ofton so small that the rotation structure
cannot. be resolved with the usual spectroscopes, even with large
gratings. The diserete band spectra then appear to be continuous. We
cannot, discuss here the methods used to distinguish between the quasi-
continuous and the genuine continuous spectra.
In contrast to the first case of the excitation of binding clectrons
which often produces dissociation, is the case investigated especially
by Price, of
absorption of light by nonbinding electrons.
As in
the corresponding case, Fig. 168, page 303 of diatomic molecules,
this leads to the seoond extreme case where the excitation can go over
into conization. In this case the molecule remains stable during the
excitation or separation of the nonbinding electron; the nuclear arrange-
ment. and vibration are independent of the motion of this electron.
Spectroscopically, Rydhorg sories of bands are observed in the vacuum
ultraviolet onto which is joined in many cases in conization continuum,
from whose long warclength limit the jonization energy con be deter-
mined. However, it must be remembered that, with polynomic
molecules, one can no longer speak strictly of one ionization energy,
beconse the iomization onergy varies greatly depending on the binding
state of the particular soparated electron. Only because, for some reason
not yet known to us, one cectron is proforbly excited and ionized,
can its conization enorgy be called that of the molocule. Our moleculer
theory here, as so often in atomic physics, has not. yet arrived it its
final slide.
We can determine what. dectron is exciled and in what
manner, if the molooke absorbs a dolinite spectrum. However, we
cannot, yet answer the question why, in a given clectron configuration


===== PDF PAGE 0412 =====

402
ATOMIC PHYSICS
of a large molecule, one particular electron and only that one electron
absorbs the incident light and becomes excited.
A systematic investigation of the third group of excitable electrons,
the study of chromophoric groups, can perhaps contribute to the
solution of this question. In a polyatomie molecule, radiation can also
be absorbed by an electron which does not belong to the shell of the
whole molecule but which is strongly localized in a definite group of
atoms. This may he a benzene ring or any similar atom group belonging
to a large molecular complex. In this case the resulting spectrum is, in
a first approximation, independent of the large complex to which the
atom group (e.g., NO, or N=N) is attached, and only finer detail
differences (wavelength displacements) permit, one to draw conclusions
about the state of binding of the particular group to the whole molecule.
Since the absorption spectra of this type of group electrons lie mostly
in the visible spectral region and thus determine the color of the material
which consists of these molecules, these absorbing groups are called
color producers or chromophoric groups.
Our knowledge of the possibility of exciting particular electrons,
which depended exclusively on the investigation of absorption, was
extended in certain cases by the investigation of fluorescence (page
351). The investigation of the emission spectra of polyatomic mole-
cules for a long time failed to produce reliable results because
these complicated structures almost always dissociated in gas dis
charges as a consequence of exciting electron collisions.
What, could
he observed, therefore, was a confusing superposition of the continuous
spectra of the molecule and its components. Recent work of Schüler
and Woeldike seems to have opened a new approach for the investiga
tion of the possibility of exciting particular dectrons in polyatomie
molecules. By using a low-current glow discharge with special pre-
cautions, they were able to excite discrete as woll as continuous emission
spectra of very complicated and casily dissociable polyatomie molecules.
By investigating a whole series of such molecules in which either different
groups were attached to the same molecule oor, conversely, the same
groups were attached to different molecular comploses, and also by
comparing the emission spectra with the absorption and Muoroscenes
spertra of the sume molecule, they were able to establish a large number
of empirical rules and relations which seem to be of high importaner for
understanding the interaction in polyatomic molecules. Interesting
differences have been ascertained concerning molecular excitation by
light (absorption) and by electron impart (excitation in a discharge).
These differences will aid us in the attempt to answer the above-
mentioned question why and how a particular elcetron is proferentially
exciter in a certain process. In the case of formaldehyde, acctone, and


===== PDF PAGE 0413 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
103
diacetyle, for example, fluorescent light is emitted from a lower cnergy
state of the molecule than that which is excited by the absorption of
light. This initial state of Auorescence is normally reached by collisions
of the second kind (page 10t) from the state excited by absorption.
This same initial upper state of fluorescence which thus cannot be
reached directly by absorption, can he excited directly from the ground
state by electron impact. In other cases, is in the case of benzene and
its derivatives, light absorption always leads to an excitation of the
nonlocalized r-electrons of the benzene ring. Recent investigations have
proved, however, that in the glow discharge (ie., by electron impact)
this emission of the Ce ring, which corresponds to a spectrum between
2000 and 3000 A, is excited only if the mass number of the individual
substituents, or that of two substituents coupled by a double bond, is
smaller than 27. Since this value is of the order of magnitude of the
mass of two Catoms in the ring (mass number 24), we seem to have
here a theoretically interesting relation: the clectron excitation can appar-
only he blocked by externally allached dom groups whose mass is greater
than that of the absorbing group. Similaly, though not quite so pro-
nounced, the mass influcnee seems to be elective in the case of excilation
of the molecules to fluorescence (decreasing intensity of Muorescened in
the series Fe, ('-, Br-benzene). What happens to the enorgy which
has been taken up, it the emission is blocked, seems not yet cleat It.
does not soom to be transformed to vibration energy. If there exists
some unknown storage mechanism, it would be of fundamental interest.
With referenee do all these questions as woll as regarding the dotailed
behavior of the diferent outer dectrons of larger molecules, many
interesting results may beoxpected from this new exporimental approach.
In concluding, we mention the interesting observation of Schüler and
Woekdike that, for example, the sharp omission bands of quinone he-
come dilluse when phenol is mixed with the omitting vapor. Apparently
the normal, undisturbed vibration and rotation of the quinone molecule
are hindered by the formation of intermolecular "hydrogen bridges,"
again vory pictorial result.
A1, the end of this section (page 107) we shall return to the question,
which dissociation process is associated with the different observed
absorption continna of polyatomie molecules. Wire, however, we shall
briefly discuss molecular rotation.
b. Rotational Structure and Moments of Inertia of
l'olyalomie Molecule's
Rotational structure, which provided to simple a mothod for deter-
mining moments of inortia and internuclear distanoes of dialomic
molecules, is rescopl. for the special case of linear molecules which we


===== PDF PAGE 0414 =====

404
ATOMIC PHYSICS
shall discuss soon) of little value in the study of polyatomic molecules.
First, the moments of inertia of even the relatively simple polyatomic
molecules soon become so large that the rotation bands can no longer
be resolved even with highly resolving spectrographs, because, according
to page 388, the distance of consecutive band lines is inversely propor-
tional to the corresponding moment of inertia of the molecule. Further-
more, in the most general case, a polyatomic molecule has three principal
moments of inertia corresponding to the model of the unsymmetrical
gyroscope, and the rotation structure rapidly becomes extremely com-
plicated for this model. Only in the case of the H.U molecule was
Mecke able to explain almost com-
pletely the details of the rotation
structure and to determine corre-
N
N
spondingly complete molecular data.
Even in the apparently simple cases
in which two or even three of the
H
moments of inertiu are equal, the
FIG. 194.
Schematic representation
of
some
linear polyatomic molecules, COz,
rotation structure is so complicated
N2O, C2H..
because of the interaction between
rotation and vibration that only a
few molecules (such as the methyl halides CHl, etc., by Herzherg)
have been accurately investigated. Actually only the linear molecules
such as COz, N20, C3Hz, etc. (Fig 194) have & simple and clearly ar-
ranged rotational structure. In these molecules, as in the diatomic
molecules, the moment of inertia about the molecular axis is zero in the
first approximation (if one neglects the deformation vibration and the
resulting orbital momentum of the molecular electrons), and the other
two moments of inertia are equal. In this case (Fig. 194) the rotation
bands are exactly equal to those of the diatomic molecules so that the
formulas of page 388 can be applied. Thus the moment uf inertia can
easily be deduced from the spectra. However, even if the masses of
the atoms forming the molecule are known, in this case the internuclear
distances cannot be computed without additional information because
different nuclear configurations can have the sume moment of inertia.
Nonspectroscopic methods, e.g., electron or X-ray diffraction, thus must
be used to determine the internuclear distances.
c. Vibration and Dissociation of Polyatomic Molecules
The problem of the vibration of an arbitrary polyatomic molecule
formed of N atoms also implies many theoretical complications. In
order to determine the number of possible vibrations we have to sub-
tract from the 3N degrees of freedom of the N atoms the three degrees


===== PDF PAGE 0415 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
405
of freedom of translation and in general three degrees of freedom for
the rotation of the whole molecule, so that there are 3N - 6 degrees
of freedom of vibration. Consequently, 3N - 6 fundamental vibration
frequencies also have to be taken from the spectrum (infrared and
Raman). From these, the actual vibrations of the molecule originate
(just as Lissajous figures of mechanical vibrations) by superposition
with amplitudes corresponding to the different excitation states.
These
3N - 6 simple (in the first approximation, harmonic) vibrations from
which all actual vibrations of the molecule are formed, are called the
normal vibrations. The six normal vibrations of a plane four-atomic
Pro. 195. The normal vibratione of the formaldehyde molecule HaCO. (After Mecke.)
molecule such as formaldehyde 1,00 are shown, as an example, in
Fig. 195. The sisth normal vibration is perpendicular to the plane of
the molecule in which the other five vibrations lie.
The fundamental difficulty in investigating the vibration of polyatomic
molecules lies in the fact that, in contrast to the diatomic molecules,
the spectroscopic determination of the fundamental frequencies of the
normal vibrations is not sufficient to draw conclusions about the forces
between the different atoms and atom groups. One cun casily sec, for
example, from Fig. 195, that the number of spiral and leaf springs one
must think of in order to meet the requirements of the normal vibrations
shown in Fig. 195, is greater than the six normal vibrations whose
frequencies can be determined from the spectrum. The number of
force constants is, for f normal vibrations, equal to SS + 1)/2. Con-
sequently, the determination of the normal vibrations from the spectrum
is not sullicient to eslablish a molecular model. In culeition, the geomelry
of the vibrations must be established, and the correct spectroscopically
determined fundamental vibration frequencies must be altributed lo the
arferent normal vibration forms.
The determination of the vibration
forms can be made by geomotrical considerations in the case of simple


===== PDF PAGE 0416 =====

406
ATOMIC PHYSICS
molecules as soon as the nuclear configuration has been established.
The vibration isotope effect, page 399, can be used to aid in establishing
the form of vibration of complicated molecules. If an isutope of a
different mass is substituted for any atom of a molecule, the chunge in
the vibration spectrum produced by this substitution is the greater, the
more the substituted atom participates in the vibration. By systemati-
cal substitutions the different forms of vibrations and their associated
frequencies can thus be determined. Another aid is the fact established
by Mecke, that the vibrations along the line joining two nuclei, the
"valence vibrations" (e.g., the first normal vibration of Fig. 195), alivays
have a higher frequency than those associated with the angular changes,
the "deformation vibrations," such as the fourth and sixth normal
vibration shown in Fig. 195. Thus the difficully in the vibrational analysis
of polyatomic molecules lies not in determininy the fundamental vibration
frequencies, which are furnished to a large exlent by Raman spectroscopy,
but in attributing these frequencies to the normal vibrations of the vibration
forms.
It is self-evident that the vibrations of polyatomic moleules are an-
harmonic, and thus our treatment of page 367J. is valid also for the
individual normal vibrations. In particular, each valence vibration cun
be represented by a potential curve such as Fig. 172, und this representa-
tion is of value in explaining the dissociation processes which we shall
discuss below. From the anharmonicity of the vibration it follows, as
in the case of diatomic molecules, that, in addition to the transitions
between neighboring states, larger vibrational transitions also occur in
the spectrum. However, these appear with smaller intensily. More-
over, it follows from the vibration anharmonicity that there is a mutal
influence of the different vibrations which is manifested in the appeur
ance of combination vibrations, ie., the superposition of difterent normal
vibrations. Obviously, this leads to an increased complication of the
vibration spectrum. This situation has an analogue in acousties where
the analysis of a composite sound phenomenon, is from in orgill pipe,
offers many difficulties. Just as in the spectra of diatomic molecules,
the frequencies of all those vibrations which cause a change of the electric
moment of the molecule occur in the emission and absorption spectra of
polyatomic molecules. The frequencies of those vibrations which change
the polarizability of the molecule can be taken from the Raman spootrum.
Again infrared and Raman spectra supplement each other in supplying
the desired information, so that almost all molecular vibrations con be
determined experimentally.
We distinguished above,
in discussing the motion of electrons in
polyatomic molecules, between localized electrons associated with a


===== PDF PAGE 0417 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
407
definite atom or atom group, and nonlocalized electrons associated with
the shell of the whole molecule. In an analogous way, we can dis-
tinguish between localized and nonlocalized vibrations according to
whether the energy of the vibration quantum is dependent upon the
nature and the state of motion of its environment in the molecule or not.
For example, according to Mecke, the vibration of two doubly bound
C atoms in all hydrocarbons has the same fundamental vibration quan-
tum on of about 1,600 cm- and so it can he termed strongly localized,
whercus the C'-H vibration vuries from 2,750 to about 3,150 cm-
with increasing binding value of the C' atom and consequently is some-
what dependent upon the environment, thus it is not localized. Such
empiricul rules, determined from investigations of a serics of homologous
molecules, are of great value for the understanding of polyatomic
molecules.
(f much greater importance for polyatomie than for diatomic mole-
cules is the interaction between vibration and rotation. It is evident
from the vibration forms such as those in Fig. 195 that this vibration
will be more or less distorted by molecular rotation, depending on the
particular type of excited vibration. This is analogous to the pertar-
bation of the vibration of a foucault, pendulum by the Coriolis force
due do the carth's rotation. Finally there are certain cases when a
molecular vibration can go direetly over into a rotation. This is possible
if, for example, a molecular group such as Calls is either free to rotato
with respect to the rest of the molecule or is hold in ils stable position
by such weak forces that it can describe slow rotatory vibrations about its
rest position, Decasionally Chose can go over into a real rotation. Thus the
clear distinetion betwoon vibration and rolation, which is charteristic
for the case of diatomie molecules, can get completely lost in the cease
of some polyatomie molecules. We cannot discuss here the corre-
spondingly complicated spectral phenomena.
After this survey d the vibrationa in polyatomic molecules we finish
our discussion by briolly considering the question of dissociation
processes. As in the case of diaomie molecules, cissociation by ab
sorption of continuous radiation due to excossive vibration is possible
(page 377), but it is limited naturally do the overexcitation of valence
vibrations (broaking of bonds). This clearly emphasizes the significane
of valence vibrations as compared to deformative vibrations. Because
of the large number of possible vibrations, there is a large number of possibili-
lies for the molecule lo dissociale. Dor this same reason, there appears
much more frequently than in the case of diatomic molecules a super-
position of discrete and continuous vibration term systems which,
according do page 388, eun leal to predissociation. In both cases,


===== PDF PAGE 0418 =====

408
ATOMIC PHYSICS
consequently, the large number of possibilities makes it often very
difficult to attribute a particular absorption continuum or a wave-
length of predissociation in the spectrum of a polyatomie molecule to a
definite dissociation process.
In favorable cases, photochemical data can be used to compute
approximate dissociation energies for the different possibilities of dis-
sociation, and then to attribute them to the observed continua (or
their maxima). This was first done by Schumacher, Stieger, and tho
author when they associated the longwave maxima of the pure con-
tinuous ClO absorption spectrum with its decomposition into CIO + Cl
with and without excitation of the dissociation products, whereas
they attributed the shortwave maximum to a photodissociation of the
molecule into the three atoms Cl + Cl + V. This interpretation was
confirmed by the simultaneous investigation of the photochemical
decomposition. Upon irradiation by light of the different wavelengths,
a different quantum yield was found which agreed with that expected
for the different processes. Similar investigations also seem promising
for other molecules. In certain cases, furthermore, a direct chomical
detection of dissociation products may be possible and could be an nid
in checking the correctness of an assumed decomposition process.
Occasionally one can go farther, as was first done by Wieland in inter-
preting the continuous absorption spectrum of the metallic halides of
the type HgIz. He was able to identify the excited dissociation product
by its emission and thus confirm the particular dissociation process.
Finally, by investigating the absorption spectra of an entire series of
homologous molecules and by substituting other atoms at various
places in the molecule, the decomposition processes can be clarified
and associated with their continuous spectra or regions of predissociation.
In general we have to understand that, with polyatomie molecules,
the value of the dissociation energy determined from the long wavelength
limit of an absorption continuum (or the wavelength where precis-
sociation begins) indicates only an upper limit. Because of the coupling
between the molecular vibrations, frequently, in the process of dissocia-
tion by the absorption of light, some of the energy is used to excite other
vibrations.
To summarize: The investigation of the spectra of polyatomic mole-
cules will give us answers about the excitation, ionization, and disso-
ciation processes and the amounts of energy required for these processes.
In the simpler cases it also permits us to determine the possibilities of
vibration and the force constants as well as the moments of inertia.
For all complicated molecules, however, the determination of the nuclear
configuration and the binding forces is possible only if the spectroscopie


===== PDF PAGE 0419 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
409
methods are supplemented by the other methods of molecular physics
mentioned on page 348, especially by electron and X-ray diffraction.
6-12. The Physical Explanation of Chemical Binding
In this chapter we have discussed the most important facts about the
structure and properties of molecules. In doing this, we did not con-
sider the difficult problem, which atomic forces account for the binding
of a number of atoms, either like or unlike, in a molecule. This is
really the fundamental problem of chemistry, because otherwise chem-
istry has to accept simply as a sort of miracle the fact that there is an
Ha, but no Ha, molecule, & CO and a C02, but no COg, an H2S04, but no
HSO, etc. The theoretical explanation of the periodic table (page 168)
was the first major achievement of atomic physics in basic chemistry.
The physical explanation of chemical binding, achieved by the methods
of quantum mechanics in 1927, completed the successful attempt to
understand the basic features of chemistry from the properties of the
atoms.
Partial success had been obtained, as carly as 1916, by Kossel, who
succeeded in explaining the binding in heteropolar or ionic molecules
(page 381), such as NaCh, as an ellect of clectrostatic forces. The
Bohr theory, just developed at that time, explained the unique behavior
of the chemically inactive noble gases from their completed (saturated)
electron shells. Atoms with one or a few external clectrons outside of
closed shells (such as alkali or alkaline-curth atoms) are clectropositive,
because they can attain noble-gas configuration by release of these
external electrons. The halogen atoms, on the other hand, are electro
negative, because they can complete their noble gas sholl by receiving an
additional elock.ron. The binding of an alkali halide molecule, according
to Kossel, is based on the following: A Naatom, for instanee, gives up
its external electron to a (i atom, thus producing a Na' and a Cil ion.
These ions, which are very stable because of their ideal noblega con-
figuration, altract each other electrostatically and thus form a polar
molecule.
Also polyatomie molecules can be explained by this effect of ionic
binding. Of the combining atoms, those from the left side of the
periodic table always appear positivoly charged, those from the right side
negatively charged. Atoms from the central groups of the table can
appear as positive or negative tone depending on whether they combine
with atoms which are farther to the right or farther to the loft in the
periodie table. The molecules Plls and Pel, re examples of this.
In PIla the coctron sholl of the D'atom is comploted, by inclusion of the
three hydrogen electrons, to form the argon noble-gas shell. It then


===== PDF PAGE 0420 =====

410
ATOMIC PHYSICS
becomes a threefold negatively charged P - - ion which binds the three
singly positive Ht ions. In the PCl, molecule, on the other hand, each
of the five Cl atoms tears away an electron from the P atom, so that its
electron shell is reduced to the noble-gas shell of neon and we get &
fivefold positive pt ion which binds electrostatically the five Cl ions.
In an analogous way, we may regard the C atom in CH, as a fourfold
negatively charged, and in CCh as a fourfold positively charged ion.
Abegg's rule (1906), according to which the sum of the highest positive
and negative valency of an atom is always 8, thus follows automatically
from the possibility of completing or reducing the electron shell to that
of a noble gas with eight outer electrons.
Kossel's explanation of polar binding is clearly limited to the binding
of atoms whose external electron shells supplement each other to form
noble-gas shells. The binding of the simplest existing molecules, such
as H2, Nz, O2, and many others, i.e., of the so-called homopular molecules,
cannot be explained on this basis.
An attempt at an explanation was made somewhat later by G. N.
Lewis with his octet theory which is still very popular with many
chemists. Lewis's theory is also based on the fuet that all electron shells
tend to complete the noble-gas shell of eight electrons, so-called octets.
By indicating each external electron (i.e., electrons outside of closed
shells) by a dot, Lewis writes the ethane molecule Call, in the following
way:
H H
H:C:C:H
By making use of the H electrons, the C atoms thus succced in sur-
rounding themselves by complete octets. Each electron pair, however,
belongs to two atoms and thus is supposed to cause the binding between
them. For many well-known molecules the octets cannot be complete.
NO,, for instance, must be written is
Ö:N:0:
However, Lewis was able to show that such molecules are the less
saturated, ie., the more active chemically, the less complete their
octet shells are. It is an important feature of Lewis's concopt that he
recognized homopolar chemical binding as an effect of clectron pairs
common to the two bound atoms. He could not yet give, however, an
explanation for this binding effect of the electron pairs.
This explanation was given, on a quantum-mechanical basis, in 1927
by Heitler and London for the He molecule. According to them,


===== PDF PAGE 0421 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
411
homopolar binding is caused by the exchange forces between the two
H atoms; the nature of these forces has been treated on page 228 for
this very example. If the distance between two H atoms, assumed to
be far away from each other in the beginning, is gradually diminished,
and the interaction of the electron clouds with the two nuclei is taken
into account, a shallow minimum of the potential energy of the system,
i.e., some binding of the atoms, results from purely classical electrostatic
forces. However, the binding energy accounts for only a small fraction
of the actually known binding energy of the He molecule. We learned
on page 231 that the quantum-mechanical binding is a consequence of an
exchange resonance. In the unperturbed state (large distance between
the two H atoms) the system is described by two cigenfunctions which
belong to the same energy cigenvalue, because the two electrons are
completely identical. This system is perturbed if the distance between
the atoms is reduced until the clectron eigenfunctions begin to overlap.
The perturbation theory for this case shows that the two energy states
of the same energy split up just as do the levels of the He atom in
singlet and triplet terms. As a consequence of this interaction, a
repulsive state of the system of two atoms is formed whose energy in-
ercases steadily with decreasing internuclear distaner, and & "bound
state" whose energy decreases to a minimum and then increases again
with decreasing internuclear distance (Fig. 119). This potential mini-
mum of the singlet state corresponde to the bound lle molecule. The
numerical caleulation of the binding energy and the internuclear distance
of 1l, by Heitler and London did not agree too well with the data derived
from the band spectra. barther refinements of the computations,
however, have resulled in complete agreement with the empirical data.
We have seen on page 232 that the eigenfunction of the bound stale in a
first approximation is obtained by addition of the eigenfunctions of the
unperturbed system of the two atoms, whereas that of the repulsive
state is oblained by subtraction 1Eos. (1-123) and (4-124)]. Explained
pictorially, this result. means that binding ocours between two atoms if
the clectron density betweon the nuclei (given by the norm of the
eigenfunction) is large. Moreover, the bond is the stronger, the more
the electron cigenfunctions overlap, because the value of the exchange
intogral (1-121) depends on this overlapping. We shall make use of
this important result in the very pictorial explanation of the angular
valences of stereochemistry.
We have seon on page 233 that, as a consequenee of the Pauli ex-
clusion principle, the spin directions of the two doctrons in the stable
ground state of the ll, molecule must be antipardlel, whereas they are
parallel for the repulsive state. For this reason, the magneti saturation


===== PDF PAGE 0422 =====

412
ATOMIC PHYSICS
of the antiparallel spins is occasionally described as the essential feature
of homopolar binding. The name spin valence is used in this connection.
However, not the spin saturation, but the sign and value of the exchange
integral ((4-121) of page 231] are decisive for the binding. In general, we
have antiparallel spin directions in the binding case, because that leads
to an electron eigenfunction which is symmetrical in the electrons, so
that for antiparallel spin directions we find a maximum of the electron
density between the nuclei. That spin compensation is not a decisive
effect may be seen from the case of the O2 molecule. Its 32 ground state
is evidence that the spin directions of the two outermost electrons are
parallel. In this case the orbital momenta L = 1 of the oxygen atoms
(ground state SP), instead of the spin momenta, compensate to form the
3I ground state of the Oz molecule. This is called orbital valence by
Heitler.
Exchange forces, which here are considered responsible for homopolar
binding, are known to us from the binding of protons and neutrons in
the nucleus (page 337). Just as nuclear hinding could be regarded as a
consequence either of an exchange of protons and neutrons, or as a
consequence of a (virtual) emission and absorption of mesons by the
nuclei (page 337), we can regard the exchange forces of the molecular
bond as due to an exchange of electrons, or as caused by (virtual)
emission and absorption of photons.
Because of the basic difficulty of a pictorial concept of the exchange
forces, it is simpler to approach the whole problem of chemical binding
from the energy point of view. Chemical binding between two atoms
occurs and can occur only if the system of the two atoms has, at a small
internuclear distance, a state of lower potential energy than if the atoms
are completely separated. Herzberg, Hund, and Mulliken have de-
veloped this approach. They consider the energy of the molecule under
consideration as composed of the contributions of all individual elec-
trons, which are thought of as being huilt into the fixed arrangement of the
nuclei of the molecule. The problem is now whether energy has to be added
or is released when a particular electron is transferred from the distant
atom into the molecule, i.e., whether this election is a "binding" or a
"loosening" electron.
This study is confined to only the valence
electrons of the atoms which form the molecule, because the internal
electron shells are saturated and therefore do not participate in the
chemical bonds. A certain particular hond then can be characterized
simply by the difference of the number of binding and loosening elec-
trons. In the O2 molecule, for instance, three of the four valence electrons
of the two O atoms find places in binding electron states of low potential
energy (2pt* and 3po'), whereas the fourth electron pair has to use up


===== PDF PAGE 0423 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
413
energy in order to reach the only available higher state (3pm"). This
electron pair thus has a loosening effect and compensates the binding
effect of one of the binding electron pairs. The final result thus is that
we have two uncompensated binding electron pairs which are responsible
for the double bond known to the chemist for the O2 molecule.
In an analogous way it is easy to find thut two atoms with two s
valence electrons (e.g., the atoms of the second group of the periodic
table) cannot form a molecule, because only one of the electron pairs
can go into a lower energy state of the molecule, whereas for the second
pair only a higher energy state is available. The effects of the binding
and the loosening electron pair thus compensate
each other, and a strongly bound homopolar Hge
molecule cannot exist, in contrast to the looscly
bound Hge van der Wauls molecule, which we
discussed on page 385. It is obvious that this
method of investigating the binding requires an
exact knowledge of the molecular clectron slates,
whose importance thus is nicely demonstrated to
Fit. 196.
Schematic rep-
the beginner. It allows us, of course, to study
resentation of the binding
theoretically all possibilities of binding betwen
in the He moloculo by
" valonces. (After Nluart.)
given atoms, ic., makes possible an investigat-
tion of chemically unknown molecules.
Finer details of the possible bonds and their characteristies can be
discussed if we make use of the wave-mechanical "shupo" of the valence
electrons, i.e., their eigenfunctions according to Fig. 116 (page 227).
The polectrone here play a particularly important role because, in
contrast to thes olectrons with their sphereal symmetry, they have an
axial symmetry. The three y electrons of the mitrogen atom, for in-
stance, are oriented in such a way that, their axes ic mutually
perpendicular. In the Had molecule, for example, the two & clectrons
of the Il atoms are bound by two o electrons of the ( atom (bond
types p. 5). As these two p electrons are oriented perpendicularly
1o cach other,
it is evident. that Had cannot. be a linear molecule.
According to Fig. 196, the p electron along the taxis can bind oly an
Il atom whose nuclous is also on the taxis, whereas the second p electron
of the @ atom, because of its orientation along they axis, con bind only
in Il alom whose nuclous is near they axis, for only then a suflicient
overlapping of the coction cigonfunctions is possible. From the wav-
mechanical "shape" of the p electrons, ir., from the ly l distribution in
space, we have thus deduced the important resull that the Hoo molecule
cannot, be a linear molecule bul should have a right angle. In a similar
way, we get, quite gonerally, the angular valences of stereochemistry.


===== PDF PAGE 0424 =====

414
ATOMIC PHYSICS
The band analysis of H20, carried out first by Mecke, has led to an
angle of somewhat over 100°, and similar deviations from right angles
are found quite generally in stereochemistry. These deviations can
be explained in a very pictorial way by the assumption that the atoms
at the sides of the angle interact with each other and thus increase or
decrease the valence angle.
An example of the binding of three s electrons by the three mutually
perpendicular p electrons of another atom is the ammonia molecule, NHs.
Its pyramidal shape thus is easily understood to be a result of the binding
of one H atom on each of the x, y, and z axes, and an additional attraction
among the H atoms.
More complicated is the case of the tetravalent carbon atom which
is of decisive importance for all organic chemistry. We shall discuss
briefly the simplest organic molecule, methane, CHa. According to
Table 10 (page 178), the C atom has, outside its closed K shell, two
28 electrons and two 2p electrons.
It happens, however,
that
these four valence electrons of the carbon atom have upproximately
the same energy. We speak of an approximate s-p degeneracy. By
their mutual interaction, the difference between s and p electrons dis-
appears to such an extent that the C atom has four practically equivalent
valence electrons. As a consequence of general symmetry rules, the
CH, molecule then should be, in agreement with experience, a regular
tetrahedron with the C atom in its center. The particular role which
the C atom plays in organic chemistry thus seems to be due to a pecu-
liarity of its electron configuration, the approximate degeneracy of the
two s- and the two p-valence electrons. On page 410 we have treated
the same CH, molecule on the basis of the Kossel theory of polar binding.
We therefore should like to use this opportunity to point out that polar
and homopolar binding are not nearly such fundamentally different
effects as it might appear at first sight. If, in the time averuge, one of the
two exchanging electrons is always near the atom 1, and one near the
atom B, we have a regular atomic molecule and so-called homopolar
binding. If, on the other hand, both electrons which are responsible for
the bond are predominantly near the atom A and none noar the atom B,
A appears to be negatively and B positively charged. AB isthen a polar
molecule (such as NaCt), and we speak of polar or ionic bonds.
Thus
polar binding also can be understood on the basis of the exchange con-
cept. Between these two limiting cases there exist innumerable transi-
tions, i.e., molecules AB in which the two binding electrons are not
always, but more often, near atom A than near B, so that we might
speak of partial ionic and partial homopolar binding. We shall not go
into any detail; we want to indicate only the fact that basically every


===== PDF PAGE 0425 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
415
bond can he understood by one theory, and that ionic and homopolar
bonds are only the two limiting cases.
The different bonds discussed so far are designated as localized bonds,
because every electron pair can clearly and definitely he attributed to
a bond between two atoms and thus causes the bond between them.
This concept of localized binding scemed to be the only possible one.
However, the most important molecule of organic chemistry, the benzene
ring C&He, could not be explained on this hasis. If one of the four valence
electrons of each C atom binds one H atom, each C atom has three free
valence electrons. In the benzene ring we thus should find single and
double bonds alternating between the C atoms, and this actually was
the opinion of its discoverer, Kckulé. This hypothesis, however, is in
contradiction to the chemical and physicochemical evidence which
points clerly to a completely symmetrical ring. E. Hückel has solved
this problem by wave-mechanical methods. He was able to prove that
each C atom is bound to its to neighboring (' atoms by single bonds,
and that the remaining six valence cectrons of the sir C atoms are dis-
tribuled uniformly over the whole benzene ring. We thus might speak of
one and one half bonds between each two Catoms. As there are no one
and one half electron pairs, it is more correct to speak of one electron
pair (one bond) between every two Catoms, whereas the remaining six
electrons are called "nonlocalized" valence clectrons. In our pictorial
concept of electron exchange it seems quite reasonable to assume that
electrons can not. only be exchanged between two neighboring atoms
(localized bond), but that the six nonlocalized elections exchange their
places in such a way that in the time average always one electron is near
each of the six C' atoms of the benzene ring. Quite a number of ad-
ditional details of chemical bonds in organic molecules can also be
explained by quantum mechanies, among them the rigidity of the double
bond against torsion.
The atomic valence theory in its quantum-mechanical form thus is
able to account for all details of the fairly complicated phenomena of
chemical binding.
Statemonts can he made also about the binding
charcter of unknown molecules. No doubt, the mathematical difficulties
of the perturbation theory as applied to huge and complicated molecules
become so insurmountable that in practical cases we have to confine
ourselves do qualitative studios and statements.
Nevertheless, the
basic solution of the problem of the chemical bond is of highest impor-
tance for theoretical as woll as practical chomistry. For this reason
it may be especially woll suited to demonstrate to the chemist the
necessity of familiarizing himself with atomic physies, including the
systematies of cloctron states and their quantum-mechanical treatment.


===== PDF PAGE 0426 =====

416
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Literature
General Molecular Physics
Eyring, H., J. Walter, and G. E. Kimball: Quantum Chemistry, Chapman & Hall,
Ltd., London, 1941.
Fermi, E.: Moleküle und Kristalle, J. A. Barth, Leipzig, 1938.
Glasstone, S.: Theoretical Chemistry, D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., New York,
1944.
Hellmann, H.: Finführung in die Quantenchemie, Deuticke, Leipzig, 1937.
Rice, F. O., and E. Teller: The Structure of Matter, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York, 1949.
Stuart, H. A.: Molekülstruktur, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1934.
Wolf, K. L.: Theoretische Chemie, J. A. Barth, Leipzig, 1941.
Spectra (except Infrared and Raman) and Molecular Properties
Finkelnburg, W.: Kontinuierliche Spektren, Springer-Verlug, Berlin, 1938. (Re-
printed in 1914 by Edwards Bros., Inc., Ann Arbor, Mich.)
Finkelnburg, W., and R. Mecke: Band Spectra, vol. 9/II, Flund- und Jahrbuch der
Chemischen Physik, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft m.b.H., Leipzig, 1934.
Gaydon, A. G.: Dissociation Energies and Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1947.
Herzberg, G.: Molecular Spectra
and Molecular Structure, Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
New York, 1939.
Pearse, R. W. B., and A. G. Gaydon: The Identification of Molecular Spectra,
Chapman & Hall, Ltd., London, 1941.
Pringsheim, P.: Fluorescence and Phosphorescence, Interscience Publishers,
York, 1949.
Sponer, H.: Molekülspektren und ihre Anwendung auf chemische Probleme,
2 vola., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1935-1936.
Weizel, W.: Bandenspektren, Ergänzungsband I, Handbuch der Experimental-
physik, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft m.b.I., Tripzig, 1931.
Infrared and Raman Spectra and Molecular Structure
Herzberg, G.: Infrared and Raman Spectra of Polyatomie Molecules, D. Van Nos-
trand Company, Inc., New York, 1945.
Hibben, J. H.: The Raman effect and its chemical applications, Am. Chem. Soc.
Monographs, 1939.
Kohlrausch, K. W. F.: Der Smekal-Raman-Effekt (mit Erginzungslund), Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1931-1938.
Kohlrausch, K. W. F.: Ramanspektren, Akademische Verlugagesellschuft m.l.H.,
Leipzig, 1943.
Rowlina, F. I. G., and A. M. Taylor: Infrared Analysis of Molecular Structur:,
Cambridge University Press, London, 1929.
Schaefor, Cl., and F. Matossi: Das Ultrarote Spektrum, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1930.
Sutherland, G. B.: Infrared and Raman Spectra, Methuen & Co., Ltd., London, 1935.
Ta You Wu: Vibrational Spectra and Structures of Polyatomic Molecules, National
University of Peking, 1939.
Valency
Kossel, W.: Valenzkräfte und Röntgenspektren, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1921.
Kronig, R. de L.: The Optical Basis of the Theory of Valency, The Mucmillan
Company, New York, 1935.


===== PDF PAGE 0427 =====

MOLECULAR PHYSICS
417
Lewis, G. N.: Valence and the Structure of Atoms and Molecules, Reinhold Pub-
lishing Corporation, New York, 1923.
Palmer,
W. G.: Valency, Classical and Modern, Cambridge University Press,
London, 1944.
Pauling, I.: The Nature of the Chemical Bond, 2d. ed., Cornell University Press,
Ithue, New York, 1942.
Penney, W. G.: The Quantum Theory of Valency, Methuen & Co., Ltd., London,
1935.
Rice, O. K.: Electronic Structure and Chemical Binding, McGraw-Hill Book Com-
pany, Inc, New York, 1940.
Sidgwick, N. V.: Tho Ilectronic Thoory of Valency, Oxford University Press,
New York, 1927.
Incidental Subjects of Molecular Physics
Debye, P.: Polor Molecules, Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York, 1929.
Jordun, P.: Kiweissmoleküle, Wissenschaftliche Verlugagesellschaft, Stuttgart, 1947.
Polanyi, M.: Atomie Reuctions, Williams and Norgate, Ltd., London, 1932.


===== PDF PAGE 0428 =====

CHAPTER 7
ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
7-1. General Review of the Structure of the Liquid and
Solid States of Matter
We now turn from the polyatomic molecules to the consideration of
the very large atomic and molecular complexes, ie., to liquids and solid
bodies, though the liquid state can be treated only very briefly in this
section. Because of the symmetry of the binding forces between atoms
in the equilibrium state, i.e., in the minimum of potential energy, the
atoms or molecules arrange themselves in a very symmetrical geometric
pattern or lattice which we call & crystal. For weaker binding forces
or at higher temperatures, the thermal motion of the atoms prevents
them from attaining this state of equilibrium. The atoms or molecules
then have a definite mobility and the regularity of the atomic pattern
is more or less disturbed. This is the picture of the liquid state of
matter.
The solid state, consequently, in its ideal form is identical with the solid
crystalline state.
In the apparently noncrystalline or amorphous struc-
tures we have either a large number of coalesced microcrystals or, as
in the case of glass, an undercooled liquid which is not a genuinely
solid body at all. The very few solids which are regarded is "really
amorphous" at the present time, such as the "explosive." modification of
antimony and one modification of selenium, apparently are not stable
modifications of the solid state, as is evidenced by the explosibility of
the amorphous antimony. The rest of this chapter will be devoted to
a thorough discussion of the solid crystalline state. In this section,
therefore, we shall take up briefly the problem of the structure of the
liquid state, of which not too much is known at present.
From the above interpretation it is clear that in liquids, in which the
average interatomic distances, because of their equivalent. densities,
are essentially the same as in crystals, the forces between doms or
molecules also tend to establish a crystallike, regular arrangement of
the atoms. However, the crystalline structure is disturbed more or less
by the thermal motion of the atoms, molecules, or ions. This explains
that in liquids we find phenomena of order as well as of disorder. For
the same reason, a completely random distribution of atoms cannot
418


===== PDF PAGE 0429 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 419
even be expected in compressed gases, and evidence of some degree of
order in such gases has been found by the X-ray method which we shall
discuss below. Although for a long time it had been assumed that the
lack of a geometrically regular molecular arrangement was a character-
istic of liquids, recently the indications of order have been studied in
more detail. It has been concluded from this evidence that there is
good reason to speak of a semicrystalline state of fluids, as O. Lehmann
did so vividly 50 years ago in his "World of the Liquid Crystals."
What at first appears to be a radical distinction brtween the solid crystal-
line and the liquid state, is idently a diflerence in the degree of mobility
of the constituents in the crystal lattice which more or less retains its
regular structure. We shall see on page 454 in the discussion of diffusion
in crystals that even in the most ideal solid crystals the constituents
have a certain mobility, and that i number of very important effects
depend upon this mobility. This mobility of single lattice constituents
(and with it the gencral disorder of the crystal) incrcases with increasing
temperature until at a definite temperature the melting point is suddenly
reached, above which a certain mobility is a characteristic property of
all particles. Even in the fluid state the mobility increases more and
more with increasing temperature, und this must cause a gradual dis
appearance of the crystalline properties. That we do not have a gradual
transition from the solid to the liquid state, but a sharp melting point,
is due to the fact that only the solid and the liquid state are thermo-
dynamically stable, but not the intermediate states, where the solid
erystal begins to looson up appreciably.
Because the assertion of the semicrystalling structure of liquids is so
surprising al first, we shall briefly discuss the most important evidence
in favor of il.
Dobye's method of scattering of X-rays by liquids provides one direct
proof. If the distribution of molecules and the intermolecular spacing
were completely random, the scattered intensily would decrease uni-
formly with increasing scattering angle. However, if there is a regular
molecular arrangoment, then maxima and minima are to be expected
as i result of the interference of the X-rays scattered by the regularly
spaced molecules.
This was actually observed. If for a number of
possible geometrical arrangements (io., liquid structures) the theoreti
cally expected seattering curves are deduced and these compared with
those obtained empirically, the moleculer structure in a liquid can be
determined with considorable accuracy in those cases which are not too
complicated. Recently the atomic arrangoment in liquid mercury has
been studied in this way by Hondus who used monochromatic X-rays.
At. 18°C the atomic arrangement agreed essentially with that of crystal-


===== PDF PAGE 0430 =====

420
ATOMIC PHYSICS
lized mercury, and thus deviated considerably from the closest spherica
packing which was expected formerly for the liquid state of mercury.
A no less significant evidence of the semicrystalline structure of
liquids is the fact that the measured value of the atomic heat of mona-
tomic liquids such as mercury or liquefied argon is 6 cal/mole. This is
twice the value to be expected for freely mobile atoms each of whose
three translational degrees of freedom contributes R/2 = 1 cal/mole to
the atomic heat. On the other hand, the constituents of a crystal vibrate
about a rest position, so that 3R/2 cal are contributed to the atomic
heat for the kinetic vibration energy and an equal amount for the poten-
tial energy, since in a harmonic vibration half of the total energy is on
the average kinetic and half potential energy. Consequently the atomic
beat of a solid body (if all degrees of freedom are excited) is 2(3R/2) = 6
cal/mole. That this same value was found for monatomic liquids can
only be explained by the hypothesis that their atoms vibrate in three
dimensions about a rest position, except that in the case of liquids this
center of vibration itself participates in a random translatory motion
which is temperature dependent.
There are a number of further results of optical and clectrical measure
ments, which we cannot discuss here, that indicate just as clearly the
crystallike arrangement of the molecules in liquids. Stuart and Kast
have investigated the dependence of liquid structures on the type of
molecule, on the temperature, and density by model experiments.
Their model liquids consisted of large numbers of differently shuped little
magnets, which were shaken continuously as a substitute for the thermal
motion, and in which the intermolecular forces were replaced by the
forces between the small magnets which replaced the molecules. The
different structures of dipole- and quadrupole-molecule liquids and
quite a number of finer details can be shown very nicoly in this
manner.
Generally the existence of strong dipole or quadrupole moments
introduces a complication in the normal liquid structure due to the
formation of molecular chains (e.g., in alcohols) or molecular clusters
as in the case of the so-called associated liquids whose anomalous be-
havior depends on the formation of these clusters. By far the most
important associated liquid is water whose anomalous behavior has long
been attributed to association. It had been thought carlier that water
consisted of polymeric molecules of the type (H2())n with & constant
degree of association n. However, all attempts to determine n have failed.
From this failure and other evidence, the conviction has grown that
water consists of molecular clusters of indefinite size. The exact struc-
ture of these molecular clusters can he determined by comparing the


===== PDF PAGE 0431 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
421
experimental X-ray scattering curves with the theoretically deduced
patterns. By this method a tridymite-like structure was found in which,
according to Fig. 197, each O atom is tetrahedrally surrounded by four
protons. This particular geometric arrangement of the He molecules,
i.c., this semicrystalline structure of water, is responsible for the well-known
abnormal propertics of water. From this, the change in the structure and
properties of water as a result of the addition of relatively few ions
(or the addition of a little alcohol) can
also be understood: the tridymite struc-
ture of water which depends on second-
ary binding forces (van der Waals
forces, page 386) is greatly distorted by
the elcetrostatic forces of the ions or by
the addition of a few large foreign mole-
cules, which at the very least influence
the size of the molecular clusters. Con-
versely, the addition of a lew Hyd) mole-
cules to pure alcohol cannot noticeably
alter its chain structure. In agrement
with this, hardly any change. in the prop-
Pri. 197. The quasi-crystallino trid-
ymite
structure existing in liquid
erties of aloohol is noticcable when it
water due to association of the Ha)
is mixed with small amounts of water.
molecules.
1(0911N,
white
apheres = hydrogen
Many empirically known properties of
lach @ atoon is tetrahedrally
liquids can be understood in this way
surrounded he four 1l atoms. (After
kortitm.)
from their crystal structure, ic., from
the viewpoint of atomic physics.
No far as can be concluded from the very incomplete investigations,
in general, the quasi-erystalline structure of liquicks is the more pro
nounced the groater the dipole moment or the larger and more com-
plicated the individual molerules.
Evidonor for this can be derived
from many remarkable phonomena which Lohman found in his studies
of large and complicated organie molecules, described in his book on
liquid crystals. Most surprising among his resulls is the double refrar-
lion of certain liquid droplels and, in many cases, i very pronounced
dichroism (diferent absorption in differont directions of orientation).
Both of these phenomena are dear evidence for an anisotropy which is
chanteristic of a crystal. On the other hand, the internal mobility,
i.r., the change of the shape of the drops, was just as evident. There-
fore, Lehmann's designation as "liquid crystals" sooms correct in spite
of the objection of many crystallographers. Thas we have to distinguish
between the sporial phenomenon of liquid crystals and the goneral pho
nomenon of the solid crystals. A discussion of Lehmann's results from


===== PDF PAGE 0432 =====

422
ATOMIC PHYSICS
the standpoint of modern atomic theory, unfortunately, is still lacking
in spite of the recently increasing interest in the structure of liquids.
With these remarks we close our brief discussion of the liquid state.
Whenever in the following the term crystal is used, it applies exclusively
to the normal, solid crystals.
7-2. Ideal and Real Crystals. Structure-sensitive and
Structure-insensitive Properties of Solids
Physics of the solid state is more or less identical with crystal phys-
ics. We begin our discussion by stressing the important difference
between ideal and real crystals. The ideal rock salt crystal, for example,
consists of negative chlorine ions and positive sodium ions arranged in
a regular geometric lattice in which each sodium ion is surrounded by
six chlorine ions, and conversely. However, this ideal crystal is only a
model and does not actually exist, first, hecause crystal growth does
not occur quite regularly, but occasionally there is a lattice defect
(e.g., a missing constituent ion) and, secondly, because the purity of the
crystal material is not so high but that here and there an impurity
atom is incorporated in the crystal lattice. Actually, even the best
real crystals have at least one missing ion or impurity atom among 106
normal constituents, i.e., according to page 18, it least 10%6 lattice
defects per cubic centimeter.
Smekal first pointed to the fact that an important difference in the
properties of crystals is related to this distinction between ideal and real
crystals. He designated those properties of crystals which were essentially
independent of lattice defects or impurity atoms as structure-insensitive.
Among these structure-insensitive properties we may name the lattice
structure, the specific heat, elasticity, thermal expansion and compressi-
bility, the energy of formation, the principal features of optical absorp-
tion (color) and dispersion, as well as, for metallic crystals, the clectronic
conductivity, and finally dia- and paramagnetism. Those properties of
crystals, on the other hand, which depend essentially on the number,
arrangement, and type of lattice defects and impurities, are called
structure-sensitive. Among these are especially the diffusion phenomena,
the ionic and electronic conductivity in insulating crystals and semi-
conductors, the internal photoeffect, plasticity, and crystal strength,
as well as certain finer features of optical absorption and luminescence
which are of importance for the typical structure-sensitive phenomenon
of phosphorescence.
The crystal defects consist, on the one hand, of lattice flaws, most
of which are either holes in the lattice or lattice atoms outside their
regular geometrical position (interstitial atoms), and, on the other hand,


===== PDF PAGE 0433 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
423
of impurity atoms in normal or abnormal lattice points. A real crystal
occasionally consists of many small, almost ideal microcrystals of about
lu diameter with defects near and on the boundaries between the in-
dividual microcrystals (layer or mosaic structure of a crystal).
In the following we shall treat first the ideal crystal and the structure-
insensitive properties of solid matter. In the second part of this chapter
we shall then discuss the real crystals and those phenomena and proper-
ties of solids which are caused by lattice defects and impurities.
7-3. The Crystal as a Macromolecule. Ionic, Atomic,
and Molecular Lattices
We have arcady interpreted the crystal as a limiting case of a very
large but unusually regular and symmetrical molecule. This point of
view presents only one side of the picture and thus has its limitations.
However, it allows us to understand many crystal phenomena without
further explanation. It seems clear, for instanee, that there can be
unlocalized clectrons in crystals, just as in the benzene ring molecules
(page 415), which are only part of the crystal as a whole. Conversely,
there are other elections, just as the emitting clectron of a chromo-
phorie group of a complicated polyatomic molecule (page 402), which
we can attribute to a definite group of atoms or even to a definite
atom or ion of a crystal. In discussing the optical properties as well
as the conductivily of crystals, this difference will prove to be very
important.
A parallel can also be drawn between molecules and crystals with
respect. to the nature of their bonds. Thus we find that in crystals
there is a classification according to the type of binding which corre-
sponds to what in molecules we called polar, homopolar, and van der
Waals binding. The ionic crystal lattice with simple ionic binding cor-
responde to the polar molecule, and it is apparent that the constituents
of the imie molecule Na'C can form only an ionic lattice in the crystal.
The alkali halide crystals are typical representatives of this type of
lattier. The alomic crystal corresponds to the molecule bound by
homopolar forces. Here we must distinguish between two types, those
with localized bonds thy dectron pairs), and those with nonlocalized
binding. The first group is called calone crystals and its best known
ropresentative is the diamond. The metals and alloys comprise the
group with nonlocalized binding.
The molecular crystal corresponde to the van dor Waals molecule
(page 381). It should be called van der Waals crystal, because not only
molecules, but also atoms can dot as crystal constituents (as in the case
of the solidified noble gases. If the lattier constituents are molecules


===== PDF PAGE 0434 =====

424
ATOMIC PHYSICS
(e.g., Ha, Clz, COz, CH2), whose atoms can be bound by polar or homo-
polar forces, the molecules themselves are held in the lattice by the
weak van der Waals forces (page 384). Accordingly, these molecular
crystals (just as the noble-gas crystals) loosen up, i.e., melt at very
low temperatures; in other words, they require for their decomposition
only a small thermal energy. All organic compounds, for example,
crystallize in molecular lattices. As a transitional type we should
mention the "layer crystal" type in which (to choose at random) LiOH,
CdIa, and CrCls crystallize. In these crystals we have a genuine atomic
or ionic binding (homopolar or polar) within the crystal layci, while the
individual crystal layers are held together only by van der Waals forces.
Bismuth
Monatamic
Graphite
valence
netals
Indium
crystals
Sulphur
Phosphorus
Quartz
Van der Waals
Silicon Carbide
crystals
Pyrites
Titania
Alloys
Mg3 Sbz
Ionic crystals
570,198. Schematic diagram of the relation betwoon the difforent type of suido. (Aster
A diagram according to Seitz (Fig. 198) presents the relation between
the different types of solids in a pictorial manner. The monatomic
metals have a definite relationship to the valence crystals, between
which the crystals of bismuth, indium, and graphite form trunsitional
cases. The alloys, and according to Pauling also the pure monatomic
metals, have some relationship to the polar-bound ionic crystals.
Evidence for this can be derived from the transitional case of certain
intermetallic compounds, such as MgaSh, with fairly well localized
bonds of the ionic type. Furthermore, there are transitions between
the valence and ionic crystals, just as in the analogous case of molecular
binding (page 41t). Thus one can consider the crystals quartz, SiO,
and Carborundum, SiC, as valence crystals with some contribution of
ionic binding. Nor are the van der Waals crystals completely isolated,
since solid sulphur and phosphorus represent transitional cases between
them and the valence crystals and, on the other hand, ice, pyrite, and
TiO, form transitional cases to the ionic crystals.
Before we consider further the question of lattice binding, at least


===== PDF PAGE 0435 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 125
for the more important cases of ionic crystals and metals, we must
briefly review the geometric arrangement and the determination of
the lattice structure of a crystal.
7-4. Crystal Systems and Structure Analysis
We have already explained that because of the symmetric forces
acting between the atoms or ions of a solid body (crystal) à stable
equilibrium is possible only if the lattice constituents are arranged in
a regular geometrie pattern. By group-theorctical methods it can be
proved that there is a finite but large number (230) of crystal systems
which are possible arrangements of the lattice
constituents in a crystal. In which one of
these systems a particular material crystal-
lizes depends upon the size of the lattice
constituents and upon the magnitude und
orientation of the forces acting between them.
The same material can crystallize in dilferent
systems depending upon the type of binding
forces; for example carbon can crystallize in
the graphite or diamond lattice. The deter-
mination of the structure ofa crystal, the so
199.
Unit. coll of the
called structure analysis, often is not simple;
rock salt crystal NaC. The
Nist
and 01" ions we incli-
it is the task of the crystallographer.
It. is
caled ly their different size.
achieved almost exclusively by means
of
X-ray dilT ration following the procedure of von Laue or Debye Scherer.
We need not, go into the details of these methods here. Some remarks
on the basis of the method may sullice.
It follows from the periodicity of the lattice structure that for cach
crystal there is a smallest clement, the clementary coll, from which the
whole crystal can he built by its translatory repetition in the three
coordinate directions. In the cubic NaCh crystal the elementary cell
(Fig. 199) is a small cube; in most cases the form of the clementary
cell is much more complicaled. If a coordinate system is constructed
whose cres are parallel de the odges of the crystal, then each crystal
plane Cind thus the whole crystal as determined by the crystal planes)
cun he charcterized by specitying the longths from the origin to the
intersections of evory crystal plane with the axes. Those lengths are
measured in units of the corresponding edges of the clementary coll.
The system gonerally applied for charcterizing crystal planes usc
not. the values from the origin to the intersoctions of the planes with the
axes themsolves, but their reciprocals which, when reduced to smallest
integral numbers, are called the Miller indices. Thus, for example, the


===== PDF PAGE 0436 =====

426
ATOMIC PHYSICS
(123)-face corresponds to the intersected lengths 1, ½, f or to the smallest
integral numbers 6, 3, 2. The (100)-face, on the other hand, is a crystal
plane parallel to the yz plane.
To determine the system of a given crystal, one uses the fact that
when X-rays traverse a crystal, they are reflected by the atoms occupying
a lattice plane in the crystal, or, in other words, they are diffracted by
the lattice points. The relation between the deflection angle a (to be
taken from the Laue pattern), the wavelength 1 of the X-rays, and the
distance d between successive lattice planes is given by the Bragg
formula
2d sin a = ni
n = 1, 2,3, .
(7-1)
Moreover, we can see immediately from the Laue pattern, Fig. 200,
that the symmetry of this particular crystal with respect to the direction
of the incident X-ruys is a threefold
symmetry, i.e., a rotational periodicity
of 120°. By taking Laue dingrams, with
directions of incidence parallel to the
different crystal axes and to the diag-
onals, & clear picture of the symmetry
of the whole crystal can be obtained,
whereas the absolute distances between
the different lattice planes follow from
Debye-Scherrer photogriphs (puge 71)
taken with monochromatic X-rays of
known wavelength. We have indicated
FIG. 200.
Laue diagram of a crystal
with three-fold symmetry.
this crystal analysis only quite briefly
because it is of no further interest to us
in the atomistic treatment of the properties of solid bodies.
However, the so-called Fourier analysis, a theoretically diffieult and
rather cumbersome quantitative evaluation of X-ray diffraction photo-
graphs, taking into account also the intensities of the radiation scattered
in different directions, provides not only the rangement of the crystal
constituents in the crystal but also a means of determining the electron
distribution effecting the binding between the atoms or ions. Figure 201
shows as an example the electron density in an NaCl crystal in which
the lines indicate the places of equal electron density and the numerals,
the number of electrons per cube of 1 A on a side. This method is
especially important in investigating the character of the crystal binding
in certain cases of transition between one type of binding and another.
We have already discussed this Fourier analysis on page 348 in our
discussions of the methods of research in molecular physics.


===== PDF PAGE 0437 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
427
7-5. Lattice Energy, Elasticity, Compressibility, and
Thermal Expansion of Ionic Crystals
After this survey of the methods of determining crystal structures
we shall consider crystal binding, and the phenomena depending upon
0,5
0.5
70.5,
0.5
2
432
120151327
LAE
0.5
0.5
235
0.2
p-a2
70605 0805-03 0310855-
10910
Pia. 201.
Distribution of the cloctron donaily in a NaCl crystal, determined by lourier
The numeral indicate the electron donsity por cube of 1A on an
ege, Caper Creme, Brill, and coworkers.
il, more carefully for ionic crystals. If we choose the model of the ideal
rock salt crystal then the binding deponds on the electrostatic attraction
between the singly charged ions Nic' and Cl. Consequently, the poten-
tial of this foree of addraction betwoon two isolated ions is
1(1) = -
(7-2)
However, the too ions are not isolated in space but are in an environ-
ment. of similar positive sodium and negative chlorine ions. One can


===== PDF PAGE 0438 =====

428
ATOMIC PHYSICS
easily see that the nearest neighbors of the ion pair under consideration,
because of their opposing charges, tend to reduce the binding. Quite
generally, all ions of the environment will contribute to the binding
energy positive or negative amounts, which decrease with increasing dis-
tance from the ion pair under consideration. The exact computations as
carried out by Madelung show that the above expression for the attrac-
tive potential must be multiplied by a factor 0.29 in order to take into
account the contributions of the other lattice constituents.
Since the two ions cannot penetrate cach other, there must be a
repulsive force in addition to the attractive force.
This repulsive force
can be described in a pictorial manner. Any attempt to decrease the
distance between two ions, if they touch each other, requires a de
formation of their shells, and this deformution requires a considerable
amount of energy. For this reason, the potential of the repulsive
forces increases with a high power of 1/r. The experimental results can
best be described by the ninth power of 1/r. Thus we have for the
potential of the forces acting between two ions
2(t) =-0.29 + %
(7-3)
where c is a constant. In order to determine its value, we make use
of the fact that for the equilibrium internuclear distance ro the potential
energy must be a minimum,
=0
(7-4)
By performing the differentiation we get
0.29
c==
9 c3т8
(7-5)
and thus
2(1) = -0.208(} - 13)
(7-6)
By plotting the potential u(r), just as we have done in molecular physics
(page 367), we get the diagram Fig. 202. So far we have only con-
sidered the binding between a Nat and one of its neighboring Cl- ions.
The term lattice potential or lattice energy means the total energy per
mole of the crystal, i.e., the energy required per mole to form the crystal
from widely separated Nat and Cl- ions.
To compute the lattice
energy, we have to consider that each Nat ion in the lattice has six
neighboring Cl ions, each of which is hound to it by the same u(r)
computed above. Furthermore, 1 mole of a NaCl crystal has No Nat


===== PDF PAGE 0439 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
429
ions from each of which binding forces extend to each of its six neighbors.
Thus the lattice energy (referred to a normal crystal with an equilibrium
distance ro between two consecutive constituents) is
(7-7)
This lattice energy is negative because it is released if the crystal
is formed from ions which are assumed to exist. If we let the
numerical values which refer to the specific case of an NaCl crystal
and the constants be contuined in a specific constant C, and if we take
into consideration that ru is equal to one
half of the lattice constant d, then the en-
ergy of all ionic crystals can be expressed by
IT =
(7-8)
The lattice energies computed according
to this theoretical formula cannot be com-
pared directly with experimental date, be-
Tki. 202. Interaction potential
a(T) between two crystal
cause the experimentally measured heat of
atituenta.
The average intor-
formation Ey of the NaCl erystal refers not
mclear distance is indicated as
a function of the vibration energy.
to the ions which make up the crystal but
to metallic sodium and Cle molecules. However, Born has shown that
the lattice energy t can be computed from the measured heat of forma-
tion Ee, provided some atomic date are known or can be measured. We
denote the measured heat of formation of the crystal by for, the heat
of vaporization of sodium metal (always referred to 1 mole) by V, the
dissociation energy of the chlorine molecule by D, the ionization energy
of the sodium atom by l, and by le the clectron affinity energy, which
is set free when an clectron is attached to a (latom. We can then write
the Born cycle in the following way:
Na (melal) + (l - Ep = NaCh (crystal)
Na (motal) + V
= Ni (atomic)
Cle
+ 1)
= 201
(7-9))
Nat
+ 1.
= Nat
- 1.
= (-
From this the lattice enorgy required do form a NaC crystal from the
Nio and (' ions is
(7-10)
Table 15 shows the good agreement of a number of lattice energies


===== PDF PAGE 0440 =====

430
ATOMIC PHYSICS
computed from the theoretical formula (7-7) with those determined
from experimental data by means of the Born cycle (7-10).
Table 15. Lattice Energies of Several Alkali-halide Crystals in Cal/Molc. Comparison
of the Measured and Commuted Values
Alkali-halide crystal
Experimental value
Computed value
NaCl
183
182
NaBr
170
171
Nal
159
158
KCI
165
162
KBr
154
155
KI
144
144
RbCI
161
155
RbBr
151
155
Rbl
141
138
From the curve of the mutual potential «(r) of two lattice constitu-
ents of an ionic crystal (7-6), derived on page 428, a number of important
macroscopic properties of crystals can be easily deduced or explained
in terms of the atomic theory.
The compressibility is defined as the decrease in volume per unit of
pressure. That energy must be applied to reduce the volume, i.e.,
decrease the equilibrium distance ro, can be seen from the potential
curve. Moreover, it can be seen immediately that the compressibility
of a crystal is the smaller, the steeper the potential curve rises from the
minimum toward smaller internuclear distances. The force I necessary
to reduce the distance can he computed by differentiating u(r) with
respect to r. Thus the work per mole required to reduce all distances
from ro to r is
(7-11)
Here p is the instantaneous pressure which increases with the com-
pression and P is the final pressure corresponding to the total change
in volume, v. Here the function p(v) has been approximated by a linear
function. Carrying through the computation results in an expression
for the compressibility,
(7-12)
The compressibility thus increases with the fourth power of the lattice
constant d, a plausible result since the compressibility must be the smaller
the more densely the lattice components are packed in the normal lattice.


===== PDF PAGE 0441 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 431
If the compressing force is removed, the equilibrium distance ro is
restored, since without external forces equilibrium can only exist if all
distances correspond to the minimum of the potential curve. Con-
sequently, the crystal is clastic. From this fact it follows that the crystal
can vibrate, i.c., periodicully increuse und decrease the distance between
the lattice points. We shall consider this important property in some
detail in the section following the next.
The last important conclusion which can be drawn from the potential
curve concerns the thermal expansion of crystals and, in general, of
all solid bodies. The vibration energy of the crystal and thus the ampli-
tude of the crystal vibrations increases with increasing temperature.
Because of the asymmetry of the potential curve (unharmonicity of
the lattice vibration) the average distance between two lattice points,
shown in Fig. 202, increases with increusing amplitude of the vibration.
Consequently, the volume of the crystal increases with increasing tem-
perature. Thus the fundamental thermal property of all known solid
bodies, their erpansion with increasing lomperature, has a vry simple
explanation from the atomic theory. In the last analysis it depends upon
the asymmetry of the potential curve, «(r).
We have limited oursolves in this section to a discussion of ionic
crystals because their properties can be accounted for quantitatively.
Qualitatively, the behavior of valence crystals, such as diamond, with
respect to the polential curve and the conclusions drawn from it, such
as compressibility, thermal expansion, de., is very similar to that of
the ionic crystals.
Phonomenologically, valence crystals are character-
ized by their great hardnoss and good doctrical insulating properties.
The latter is due to the fact that cleotrolytic conductivily, which will
be considered in dotail for ionic crystals on page 457, is not possible
because the constituents are atoms. Electronic conductivily, on the
other hand, is impossible because, due to the srongly localized valence
binding, electrons are so strongly bound that there are no conduction
electrone available.
7-6. Review of the Binding Forces and Properties of Metals
Now that we have considered the properties of insulating crystals
with strongly localized bonds, we shall briefly discuss the binding and
the atomic proporties of the other extreme of solids, the metals. They
are charaderised by a lack of localized binding. Such a revion of the
propertion of metals appears to be the more appropriate as metals have
to be roguded, from a practical tochnical standpoint, is one of the
most important groups of solida. Moreover, many of the properties
of metals, their moditications (dilleront forms of lattices in different


===== PDF PAGE 0442 =====

432
ATOMIC PHYSICS
temperature regions), and their alloys were first explained by atomic
physics which also threw new light on the problem of the technological
treatment of metals (e.g., hardening and tempering).
• In the course of this chapter we shall consider and explain the charac-
teristic differences between insulators and metals from different points
of view. At this time it is sufficient to conclude from their high electrical
and thermal conductivity, that the outermost electrons of the atoms
forming the metal (in general, one per atom) are not tightly bound to
their atoms as they are in most insulators. On the contrary, they must
have a high mobility within the metal just as do the molecules of a gas.
This is why we often speak of the electron gas in the metal, a degenerate
electron gas, according to page 239. These external atomic electrons
which, as valence electrons, are also responsible for binding (page 409),
are thus by no means localized. According to page 415, the last six
valence electrons of the C.H, molecule are distributed, as nonlocalized
electrons, among all six Catoms of the benzene ring, and thus participate
in its binding, though they do not form electron pair bonds. In &
similar way the nonlocalized conduction electrons of a metal must be
responsible for the binding in the metallic state (metal crystal). How-
ever, again there is no mutual saturation of electron pairs to form local-
ized bonds. In contrast to homopolar binding, metallic binding thus does
not show the phenomenon of saturation.
Whercas two homopolarly
bound H atoms cannot bind an additional Il atom, in a metal each
additional atom is bound with the same force independently of the
number of atoms already bound in the crystal.
We know from experience that the elements on the left side of the
periodic table exhibit metallic character, whereas localized binding
predominates in crystals formed from the elements on the right side
of the table, and it is here that we find the insuluting crystals. According
to Hume-Rothery, the reason for this distinction is that metals generally
crystallize in a body-centered or face-centered cubic lattice or in a
hexagonal; close-packed structure. On the other hand, the elements on
the right side of the table belong to very different lattive types in which
the coordination number (the number of surrounding atoms at the same
smallest distance from one atom) is always equal to the valence of the
atom under consideration. According to Fröhlich this difference depends
upon the repulsive Coulomb forces between each one and all the outer
electrons. Sodium and chlorine, for example, each have the valence 1.
Sodium has only one outer electron, whereas chlorine, which lies on the
right side of the periodic table, has seven. The binding effect of the one
electron pair in the Na-Na and CI-Cl pairs therefore is different,
because in Cl-Cl we have an additional repulsion between the two times


===== PDF PAGE 0443 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
433
six excess electrons. Such a repulsion is not present in the case of
Na-Na. Nevertheless, in the case of the diatomic Cl molecule, there
is a strong homopolar binding because the exchange forces (page 412)
produce a unilateral charge displacement (and thus an attraction be-
tween the atoms) which compensates for the repulsion due to the other
electrons. However, such an asymmetry of the electron configuration is
incompatible with the high symmetry (coordination number) of the
crystal lattice. Thus, because there is no Coulomb repulsion, sodium
atoms can be hound by metallic binding in the Na-metal lattice, whereas
for Cl atoms such a symmetrical binding is not possible. The Cl atoms
can form Cle molecules by unilateral deformation and reduction of their
internuelcar distance. These molecules can then be bound in a crystal
lattice by the relatively small van der Waals forces (page 386). This
contrasti, which was explained here as an exumple for Na and Cl, holds
in general for all clements on the loft or right side of the periodic table:
on the left side we have metallic binding with high symmetry and coordina-
tion number, on the right complicated lattices strongly influenced by the
valence and always without clectrical conductivily.
We may also mention that other important properties of all solids,
such as compressibility and plasticity, are related to these differences.
Both decreuse in going from the left to the right, as a result of the in-
creusing eflect of the repulsive action of the outer clectrons.
Metallic binding is thus characterized by the lack of valence satura-
tion, and therefore by a high symmetry (equally strong binding of all
equally distant neighhors independent of the valence of the metallic con-
stituents). We shall try to understand the reason for this behavior of
metals. Because of the high metallic density, the distance from atom to
atom in the latlice is smaller with reference to the atomic radi than in
most insulators. We have, therefore, a strong overlapping of the elec-
tron shells of the original atoms which form the metal lattice. This over-
lapping means, according to the exchange theory (page 233), that there
is a high exchange probability of the outermost electrons between
neighboring atoms, and thus a large exchange binding energy. How-
ever, Dehlinger and ladling have proved that we may also look at the
problem from another point of view. We may speak of a normal forma-
tion of electron pairs, and thus emphasize the relation between metallic
binding and normal valence binding. However, we have then to consider
these election pair bonds between one atom and its neighbors as
rotating, so that over an avorage of time we have again a symmetrical
(nonlocalized) distribution of the clockrons which cause the binding. It.
can be shown thermodynamically that this state with rotating bonds
can he more stable at higher temperatures than the states of unilateral


===== PDF PAGE 0444 =====

434
ATOMIC PHYSICS
homopolar or polar binding. This case seems to be realized in many
metal alloy latties which have higher coordination numbers at higher
temperatures than they do at lower temperatures.
Pauling has extended this picture by the additional assumption
(whose correctness he was able to show thermodynamically), that ionic
states also contribute to the normal metallic bonds. Thus a mono
valent alkali atom in a metal occasionally should have two valence
electrons and thus, as a negative ion, should be able to bind simul-
taneously two of its neighbors.
In general it can be said that in metals the nonselective metallic
binding predominates and determines the metallic character.
Never-
theless, the individual properties of the atoms, especially their spin,
orbital momentum, and the valence determined by them, play a certain
role. Thus, in addition to the general metallic binding, there is a certain
amount of heteropolar or homopolar binding. Consequently, a metal
always crystallizes in the lattice of highest symmetry which is compatible
with the special properties of the atomic lattice components. For example,
in the case of the alkalies, it follows from the diamagnetism of the metal
that the spin momenta of the outer electrons of the atoms are alter-
natingly antiparallel. For this case, quantum-mechanical computations
(by means of the exchange integral, pages 231 and 232) show that the
body-centered lattice, in which each atom is surrounded by eight atoms
of oppositely directed spin, is more stable than the lattice espected
for pure metallic binding, in which each atom is surrounded hy 12 others
at equal distances, half of which have one spin direction and half the
other. The energetically necessary antiparallel spin directions of the
alkali electrons, which are empirically demonstrated in the dimagnet-
ism of the alkali metals, thus are responsible for the fact that, not the
lattice corresponding to pure metallic binding with i coordination
number 12, but the body-centered lattice with coordination number 8,
has the lower state of potential energy. Any other structure and any
other spin distribution has a lower stability. The body centered lattice
which is expected theoretically has actually been found for the alkali
metals by X-ray experiments.
In a similar manner the empirically established lattice structure of
metals and alloys, which in turn accounts for many other properties of
metals, can be explained in great detail from the point of view of atomic
physics. An especially good example is presented by the diflerent modifi-
cations of iron, i.e., the different stable lattice structures at different
temperatures, which are only partly ferromagnetic. These can be
understood by a detailed discussion of the effect of exchange energy
(page 15l). The second technically significant example of the co-


===== PDF PAGE 0445 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
435
operation of metallic and homopolar or polar binding is that of the
alloys, i.e., mixed crystals of different metals. In general, substitutional
mixed crystals are observed in alloys (if the difference in the atomic radii
is not too great), in which both metals occur in arbitrary proportions.
However, it follows from sudden changes of the electrical resistance as
well as of the magnetic propertics, that for certain rational proportions
of the components (corresponding, for example, to the compounds
AuCu, AuCus, FeCo, or Ni,Fe) especially stable so-called superstructures
occur which provide further evidence that the general metallic binding
is superimposed by some localized binding which exhibits saturation
characteristies. These localized valence forces which cause an ordered
structure of alloys (e.g., Cu ions in the center and Zn ions at the corners
of the clementary cubes in B-brass) are very weak forces. Evidence
for this is the observation that at temperatures of only a few hundred
degrees this ordered structure disappears and is replaced by a disordered
lattice with a probability distribution of Cu and Zn ions.
For the sake of completeness, we mention that, besides the substitu-
tional alloys, there exist also interstitial alloys, in which small ions like
H, C, or N occupy interstitial places (see page 454). The systems
palladium-hydrogen and iron-carbon ie examples of such interstitial
alloys.
Among the important properties of metals, to be explained by atomic
physies, we finally mention ferromagnetism and supraconductivily.
The former will be discussed after we have leaned more about the
behavior of dectrons in metal crystals, whereas supraconductivity
cannot as yet be satisfactorily explained in spite of some promising
approaches.
7-7. Crystal Vibrations and the Determination of Their
Frequencies from Infrared and Raman Spectra
Because there is i quasi-clastic binding foree effective between the
lattice constituents of a crystal, vibrations betweon them are possible
just as they are between the nueles of molecules (page 365). The
assymetrical potontial curve ar) (Fig. 202) is evidence that we are
dealing with anharmonic vibrations. We have already used this fact
in explaining the thermal expansion of solids.
We have to distinguish betweon the socalled internal vibrations and
the latlice vibrations propor of a crystal. Internal vibrations occur
particularly in molecular crystals (page 123), in which real molecular
vibrations are possible within the molecules which form the lattice con-
stituents. These molocular vibrations may be disturbed more or less by
the crystal lattice, but have nothing else to do with the whole crystal.


===== PDF PAGE 0446 =====

436
ATOMIC PHYSICS
In the lattice vibrations proper, on the other hand, the whole crystal
participates. To illustrate these two types of vibrations we shall use
the calcite crystal CaCO. In this crystal the lattice components are
the ions Cat+ and (COs)-. The vibrations of all ions of one kind with
respect to the ions of the other kind are called the external or lattice
vibrations, because the whole lattice participates in this vibration. On
the other hand, there are internal vibrations within the COs group
(e.g., the O atoms vibrate with respect to the C atom) which have
nothing to do with the calcite crystal as a whole. Therefore they occur
with the same frequencies in other crystals containing the COs group,
such as FeCO, or MgCOs.
We have to distinguish two types of lattice vibrations. In the first
type, all identical lattice constituents vibrate in phase (optical vibra-
tion), whereas in the second type the vibrations are not in phase (so-
called acoustic vibrations). In the first case we have, at least in ionic
crystals, a vibration of all positive ions with respect to all negative ions,
i.e., a vibration of the whole Nat lattice with respect to the Cl lattice.
As a result of the corresponding change of the dipole moment this
vibration must appear in the infrared absorption spectrum. For
this reason we speak of optical vibrations. In the other extreme case
the vibration progresses in the crystal as a longitudinal wave. Since
in this case similar atoms do not vibrate in phase, the changes in the
dipole moments largely compensate each other. Therefore these
vibrations do not appear in the infrared absorption spectrum and are
called acoustic vibrations since longitudinal waves of this type are
known from acoustics. They are less important for crystal physics
than the optical or fundamental vibrations of the lattice.
The frequency of the fundamental vibration associated with a change
of the dipole moment (which may originate from the polarization of
the vibrating atoms) can be taken from the infrared absorption spectrum
of the crystal. The absorption coefficient of the corresponding wave-
lengths is very large, because all lattice ions participate in this vibra-
tion. Absorption measurements therefore are made with very thin
crystal laminae. A more elegant and simpler method, although not so
exact, is the reststrahlen method of Rubens. Because of the relation
between absorption and reflection, the crystal reflects strongly those
wavelengths which correspond to the fundamental vibration, whereas
the other wavelengths are mainly transmitted by the crystal. If a
light ray is reflected hack.and forth many times between two plates of
the crystal under investigation, then all wavelengths except those of the
fundamental vibration are gradually eliminated by transmission. The
residual rays, or reststrahlen, remaining after many reflections thus


===== PDF PAGE 0447 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS GE THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
437
consist essentially of the fundamental vibrations whose wavelengths
can easily be measured. Occasionally it happens that, as a result of
special symmetry relations which exist, for example, in fuorspar CaFa,
the fundamental vibration is not associated with a change of the total
dipole moment and thus it is optically inactive. In that case it cannot
be found in the absorption spectrum.
If the polarizability of the lattice constituents is changed by such
optically inactive vibrations, as is almost always the case, the fre-
quencies of the vibration under consideration can be determined by
Raman effect measurements us in the corresponding case in molecular
physics (page 352). This implies the advantage of working in the
visible or ultraviolet region, so that optical spectrographs with their
higher resolving power und dispersion can be used. Ultraviolet and
Raman investigations again supplement euch other so that there is no
basic difficulty in determining the frequencies uf the fundamental
lattice vibrations.
7-8. Electron Configuration and Electron Transition Spectra
in Crystals. The Energy Band Model
After the discussion of the types of solids, crystal structure, and
crystal vibrations, we turn to the phenomena depending upon the
electrons in crystals. We investigate first the electron configuration.
The problem of the clectron configuration in crystals and of the spectra
resulting from electron transitions can be approached from very different
points of view, all lewling to the same result.
We consider first the transition from an undisturbed atom to one which
is strongly disturbed by its environment (atom in a plasma, page 187),
and finally to one which is incorporated in a crystal is a greatly dis
turbed lattice atom. By this very pictorial approcch, we arrive at an
essentially correct picture. Undisturbed atoms have, according lo
page 106, the sharp chorgy levels of the bound and the continuous
energy regions of the free (ionized) electrons. In the spectra of plasma
atoms which are disturbed by the microfields of their environment, the
broadening of the higher enorgy stales of the electrons as a result of
the perturbation is already very noticcable (page 187). For the highest
onergy states just below the ionization limit, it can no longer be decided
whether they still are lo be considered as discrete energy states of the
bound clections or as continuous energy rogions of the free electrons
(reduction of the elective conization potential). Finally, if we go to
the lattice constituents in a crystal, wo expect a different behavior,
aside from the increasing magnitude of the perturbation and a broad-
ening of the chergy states, only insofar as there is no longer a completily


===== PDF PAGE 0448 =====

438
ATOMIC PHYSICS
free electron. An electron released from its original atom will now move
"quasi-freely" throughout the crystal in the periodic potential field of all
lattice ions. We have thus arrived, in a pictorial way, at the correct
picture of the electrons in a crystal. It is evident and clear that by
incorporating the atom in a crystal lattice, we do not influence the
inner electrons which are responsible for X-rays. These innermost
electrons remain strongly bound to their respective nuclei; their energy
states are practically undisturbed and therefore remain
sharp. Evidence for this is the sharpness of the X-ray
lines emitted by metallic anticathodes (sec Fig. 67, page
119). The perturbation and thus the brealth of the energy
levels of clectrons increases greally with increasing principal
quantum numbern. In the case of the optical energy levchs,
which in yeneral are not occupied by electrons, this width
reaches several electron volls, so that one can readily speak
of energy bands of the electrons which are now arcady
quasi-frec. We shall see that these quasi-free electrons
are responsible for the electronic conductivity of the
metals (page tt3). for the highest energy levels the
Fict.
203.
En-
ergy-band
din-
hand width actually becomes so great that there is an
grain
of
the
overlapping of the different bunds. Weshall discuss this
electrons in &
crystal
(sche-
when we take up the theory of metallic conductivity.
matic).
An energy band diagram is shown in Fig. 203.
It is interesting to show how one can arrive at the
same result by an entirely different approach. For that reason we
mention two other concepts. They are less pictorial but they have the
advantage that they permit an exact computation of the behavior
uf the crystal clectrons.
One approach is basel on the concopt of resonanee or exchunge
splitting which was discussed in Chap. 4. Quantum mechanics shows
(page 230), that in the case of two coupled alomic systems of equal
energy their common energy state split into two energy slates, as a
result of this energy resonance. The sepunction of these new states is
the larger, the stronger the coupling between the two systoms. This care
exists in crystals where in principle an exchange of electrons by any two
lattice constituents is possible because of their complete identity. Thus
if the crystal consists of Natoms, then its a result of the possibility of
exchange of each clectron with the N-l analogous electrons, each energy
state of the atoms in the crystal splits up into Nonorgy lovols. We dis
tinguish these N energy levels of every energy band by ‹quantum num-
bers k. This k is closely related to the momentum of the particular
electron and thus corresponds to the orbital quantum number l, intro-


===== PDF PAGE 0449 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
439
duced on page 130 for the bound atomic electrons. According to the
Pauli principle, each k state can be occupied by two electrons of opposite
spin. The magnitude of the splitting, and thus the width of the band resulting
from the N levels, depends on the degree of coupling, i.c. on the exchange
probability of the clectrons Eq. (4-121, page 231]. We discuss this elec-
tron exchange by means of the potential curve diagram Fig. 204. In
Fig. 105 (page 187) we had represented the course of the potential near
a hydrogen nucleus together with the energy states of the electron which
moves in this potential field. In a solid, because of the gometrically
regular arrangement of the atoms, we have a three-dimensional periodic
Boundary
Conduction
surtace
band
Fist. 204. Potontial fiekl in a crystal with eloctron states, excitation hands, and ionization
(conduction) band (schematic).
repetition of polental wells and potential walls, which are indicated in
Fig. 204 with the corresponding energy bands. The innermost electrons
of the crystal atoms lie alost completely within the potential troughs of
their ions. An exchange of these electrons with corresponding electrons
of other atoms is impossible classically. Because of the tunnel ellect
(page 23t), it is not quite impossible according lo quantum mechanics,
but it is very improbable because of the height of the potential wall
which must be penetrated. Because of the small exchange probability,
the splitting of the enorgy levels, and thus the breadth of the energy
bands of the innermost electrons, in agreement with our first picture
and with experience, is very small. Conversoly, the exchange prob-
ability and the breadth of the enorgy bands resulting from the energy
levels is very great for the quasi free external dectrons. Thus our
picture is in agreoment in ils results with our first grossly pictorial
derivation. However, it shows that the energy bands consis theordeally
of miscred choray levels and are practically conlinuous only because of
the large number of thes levels. This number per mole of the crystal equals
the number of lalice aloms and thas anounts to 6 X 103.


===== PDF PAGE 0450 =====

440
ATOMIC PHYSICS
In our third method of representation we start from the quasi-free
electrons in the crystal and we shall show that there must be certain
forbidden energy regions, the regions lying between the energy bands.
To do this we consider electrons moving in the lattice according to
wave mechanics as progressive electron waves whose wavelength &
(page 197) is
(7-13)
if E is the energy of the electrons. Now it can be shown geometrically
that only for certain definite wavelengths \ or certain energy values E
the electron wave can penetrate the crystal. For different values of
E or A the electron wave is reflected by the lattice planes in such & way
that it is extinguished by interference. The quantitative treatment of
these considerations, which are only indicated here, leads naturally to
the same results as the other two methods of approach. For this exart
computation an expression for the three-dimensional periodic lattire
potential is sought in which the electrons move. This expression is
inserted in the Schrödinger equation (4-42), page 207. This equation
has for solutions the eigenfunctions which describe the behavior of the
electrons in the crystal, only for certain energy regions, i.e., for exactly
the energy bands of our diagram Fig. 203.
In order to prevent a possible misunderstanding we want to emphasize
one point. The broad energy bands of solids are pure electron energy
bands and cannot be regarded as smeared bands of band systems of
macromolecules. In molecules (page 364), electronic motion and
atomic vibration are closely coupled with one another because an excita-
tion of an electron produces in general a change in the molecular bind-
ing and as a result produces a vibrational excitation (Franck-Condon
principle, page 370). Thus in a molecule an electron transition gener-
ally is associated with a change of vibration (rotation). A whole hand
system results from one electron transition because of the large number
of vibrational and rotational energy changes coupled with it. If we
disregard the internal vibrations in the molecular crystals, crystal
vibrations affect, in general, the whole crystal lattice. It seems evident that
lattice vibrations are less influenced by the excitation of individual electrons.
Thus in a crystal the coupling between the motion of electrons and the
vibration is very small. To an electron transition from one energy band
to another in a crystal there corresponds a spectrum which might he
regarded as a broadened spectral line and is usually called a spectral
band. It should be kept in mind, however, that it has nothing to do
with a molecular band or band system, because in the case of a spectral


===== PDF PAGE 0451 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
441
band of & crystal the characteristic property of a band spectrum, the
participation of the vibration and rotation energy, is missing.
We return now to the energy bands of the crystal electrons. The
distribution of the h levels (see page 438) over each energy band can
be taken from the spectrum: its density is greatest in the center of the
band and it decreases to zero at the edges of the band. The intensity
distribution of a spectrum resulting from i transition from a sharp
(inner) level to an energy band thus is similar to that of a broadened
spectral line (the bell shaped curve, Fig. 103).
For the selection rule for optical transitions hetween energy bands it
follows from the theory that transitions between all the different energy
bands («different n's) we allowed, but with
the important restriction that in optical
transitions the quantum number k must not
change. Since k is related to the momentum
of the electron, this is essentially a conse-
quence of the law of conservation of mo
(a)
(b)
mentum. Surprisingly, the enumeration of
Pid. 205.
Differont
cases of
mlowed transitions between two
k in the energy bands is not the sane. If,
energy buncle.
as assumed in Fig. 205a, l increases from
the lower to the upper edge of the onorgy band, then the short- and
longware optical transitions ar shown by the crows in Mig. 205a.
The width of the corresponding spectral band is equal to the differenes
in the widths of the two combining enorgy bands. However, it l in-
creases in one band from the lower to the upper edge of the band, and
in the other band from the upper to the lower edge, then the possible
short- and longwave transitions are shown by the arrows in Fig. 2056.
In this case the width of the speeded hand is given by the sum of the
widths of the onorgy bands. In the case of molals, for example, both
cases oceur. We shall see on page 170 how important the li-selection
rule is for understanding the luminescenee of crystals.
A very nice experimental proof for the width and arrangement of the
nonoccupied optical enorgy bands can be lakon from X-my absorption
spectra. According to page 123, the longware limit of the X-ray
absorption continua originates from raising an olectron to an unoccupied
energy level near the conization limit. of the atom. The longwave stric-
ture of an X-ray absorption olge thus collects directly the enorgy band
structure in the crystal. This has been found to be in best agreement
with the theoretical results developed above.
There is little do say about the optical spect of solids associated
with electron transitions so long as do speak of pure and ideal crystals.
Absorption spectra usually result from trunsitions of clostrons from the


===== PDF PAGE 0452 =====

442
ATOMIC PHYSICS
highest occupied energy band into one of the higher unoccupied bands.
Depending on the different magnitudes of the interaction of the elec-
trons, ie. their exchunge probability, we find broad continuous absorp-
tion bands in the ultraviolet and partly in the visible spectral regions
for the metals, and very narrow bands, almost lines, for the crystals
of the rare earths. This last result agrees well with our pictorial concept:
the spectra of the rare earths result from trunsitions of electrons within
the inner 4f shell which is shiekled by the 5-quantum electrons (see
Fig. 99) ngainst external influences. These energy bands, consequently,
are broalened only slightly. The large number of these transitions is
due to the fact that the selection rules which are valid for isolated atoms
are made invalid by the external influence of the interatomic electric
fields in the crystal (see puge 129).
Emission spectra of pure, ideal crystals can result from transitions of
excited electrone from a normally unoccupied hand to holes of a lower
hand, but these are very improbable, since the requirement of equal
ki-quantum numbers for the excited electron and the hole in the nearly
filled lower band is almost never fulfilled. We shall become acquainted
with the details of this on page 470).
7-9. Completely and Incompletely Occupied Energy Bands in
Crystals. Electronic Conductors and Insulators
According to the Energy Band Model
We can use the onergy band model of the crystal clectrons to draw
conclusions about the clectronie conductivity of crystals, conclusions
which are as pictorially clear as they are important. Our aim is to
give an atomistic explanation of the fundamental differenee between
metals and insulators. What are the conditions which determine
whether a crystal is a good electronic conductor or an insulator?
In order that doctric charge can be transported through a crystal
by its dlectrons it is necessary that, is a result of the movement of
electrons in the electrie field to the positive pole, there be an excess of
electrons on the positive side and a deficit on the nogative side. Now
if the highest hand occupied by clectrons is completely filled, and if we
disregard the possibility of an dectron jumping to a higher band (since
this roquires vory high tomperatures or optical excitation), then the
accumulation of an excess of coctions on one side of the crystal is not
possible. The migration of cloctrons toward one side of a crystal through
a fully occupied band is possible only if simultaneously an equal number
of clectrons migrates toward the other side. One can understand that
i unidirectional migration of electrons in a filled band is impossible,
because the olectrons would have to take enorgy from the field if they


===== PDF PAGE 0453 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
443
are accelerated by it. However, there are no energy states available
for these electrons of higher energy in a filled band. Thus, electron
conduction is not possible in crystals with completely filled energy bands.
These crystals therefore are called electronic insulators.
On the other hand, if in a crystal the highest energy band which con-
tains electrons is not completely filled, then, according to the above state-
ments, unidirectional migration of clectrons is possible. Consequently,
metallic conductors are characterised by the property that the highest of
the occupied eneryy bands is incompletely filled.
How does this theoretical result agree with our empirical knowledge
of the highest necupied energy hands of the metals? According to our
discussion on page 439, cach energy band of a
crystal consisting of N atoms has "room" for
2 N clectrons, i.e., for two clectrons per atom.
According to the Pauli principle (page 169),
each li state can be occupied by two electrons
FIG. 206.
Overlapping of
with oppositely directed spin.
We also know
the highest occupied energy
that the highest energy hand of a crystal is
hands of a bivalent metal
and occupation of the two
occupied by the valenee electrons of the con-
bands by electrong.
For
stituent. doms. Conscquently, it is clear that
clarity the two bands are
shown side by sido.
the monovalent metals are dectrical conductors,
because they have only one clectron per atom in the highest energy
band, which thus is only half filled. However, according to this simplest,
concept, bivalent metals should be insulators, in contrast to experience.
Now in metals the interaction of the clectrons which determines the
width of their energy bands land which, according to page 432, also
causes the metallic binding of the atoms in the crystal) often is so large
that the upper energy bands of the metals partially overlap. Sinee the
state to which the system tends is always that of the smallest potential
energy, the 2N valence electrons will distribute themselves in the manner
shown in Fig. 206. In this figure the bands are shown one beside the
other. Instead of completely filling one band and leaving the other un-
filled, the 2N valence electrons thus fill both bands up to the same level.
As a resull of this merlappiny of the higher bands in a crushed with large
interaction between the clectrons, the highest occupied bands of the bivalent
metals are ned completely filled and these solids thas show the clectronic
conduclivity which is characteristic for melals.
That the situation presonted here is not only a hypothesis but that
it corresponds exactly to reality has been shown by a very beautiful
experiment. of Skinner. The experiment concorns the X-ray emission
spectra of various metals. We know from page 138 that the lower
electronic slates in a crystal can be regarded as sharp levels because of


===== PDF PAGE 0454 =====

444
ATOMIC PHYSICS
the small disturbance of the innermost electrons of the atoms by the
lattice. The X-ray lines of lighter elements which are emitted after
ionizing an electron of the K shell (page 117), correspond to transitions
from the upper broad energy band (so-called conduction band) to the
K level which is very sharp in comparison.
The width and intensity
distribution of the emitted X-ray band thus gives us a direct picture of
the width of the upper energy band and its clectron population. Densi-
tometer curves of these X-ray emission hands are shown in Fig. 207 for
the monovalent lithium metal and the bivalent magnesium metal.
Only half of a bell-shaped curvc is clearly visible in the first case, and this is
LiK
Mg
270
230
2501
260
280
300
FIa. 207.
Donsitometer recordings of the X-ray emision bands of & monovalont (Li)
and a bivalent metal (Mg), as evidence for the correctness of the band arrangemont in
Mg socording to Fig. 206. (After Skinner.)
pictorial widenee that the upper band of lithium is only half filled with
electrons.
In the case of the trialent magnesium, on the other hand, it can
he casily recognized that the d'-ray nission band originales from the
transitions from two partially occupied, orlapping enora! bands to the
same lower sale. This is in complete agreement with our discussion
given above. In a similar way the energy bands of the alkali-halide
crystals and those of a number of oxide crystals have also been
studied and attributed to definite electron transitions.
We conclude with a remark about the lemperature dependence of
the clectronic conductivity. In the ideal nonvibrating crystal, the
coupling between the electrons in the conduction band and the lattice
built up of their ions is very small and the conductivity is correspond-
ingly large. The lattice vibrations tend to reduce the clectron mobility
because the doctrons collide more often with ions and are scattered
irregularly. As the amplitude of the lattice vibrations increases with
increasing temperature, the migration of the electrons through the
erystal is inhibited to an increasing extent. The electric resistance of
the metals increases with increasing temperature, because the electrons
must, "work their way" through a potential field which varies with
respect to space and time. The empirical law according to which the


===== PDF PAGE 0455 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 445
electronic conductivity at low temperatures is proportional to T- thus
appears to be explainable in a qualitative way. On the other hand,
a conduction phenomenon which cannot be satisfactorily explained
from the theoretical point of view is that of supraconductivity. This
is the remarkable effect that a large number of metals and metallic
compounds seem to lose their electrical resistance completely in the
vicinity of the absolute zero of temperature. According to Heisenberg,
this phenomenon scems to be ussociated with a lattice-like arrungement
(produced by electrostatic repulsive forees) of those few high-energy
conduction electrons which are not yet "frozen" in their lowest possible
energy states.
7-10. The Potential Well Model of a Metal. Work Function,
Thermionic Electron Emission, Field Emission,
Contact Potential
In our discussion of solids and particularly of metals from the atom-
istic viewpoint, we have neglected surface effects. We shall now interest
ourselves in those phenomona, and especially in the passage of clectrons
through the surlace laver of a crystal into free space (vacuum or air)
or into another melal.
In this respect we must think of the clectrons in the conduction bard as
bound not to the indiridual latlice ions but le the crystal as a whole and
that, consequently, for an deetron to escape on of the crystal, energy must.
be expended agains this binding foree.
The enorgy required to release
an clectron from a motal into free spare is called the work function o.
Thus the polontial enorgy of an clectron is greater in tree spaed by
the amount a than it is for the cloctron in the crystal. Were represent
this behavior by a potential cure in the customary manner and thus
obtain the potential well model of a molal (Fig. 208). In this represen-
tation we are concorned only with the quati free conduction clectrons.
Only their enorgy levels are, thorofore, indicated in Vig. 208. Weser
that the potontial of an olectron at rest in the interior of the moral (lower
edge of the conduction band) is smaller boy an amount see thin it is
outsido the motal. However, this potential difference is not the elective
work function for the rolense of an doction from the medal. Tho
elective work function d is much smaller than do because the enorgy
levels within the potontial woll are filled by coctrons up to a height. &.
According lo Permi statisties (page 238) doctrons in the highest sale
aroady have a sero-point onorgy equal too. The clective work func-
tion for those doctrons which de most casily released from the moral
thereforo is
(7-14)


===== PDF PAGE 0456 =====

446
ATOMIC PHYSICS
The behavior described here holds exactly for absolute zero, whereas
at higher temperatures there are always a certain number of electrons
in higher, formerly unfilled states.
The potential well model gives us a very pictorial explanation for
the emission of electrons by an incandescent metal. It is clear that
electrons with kinetic energies Ex > @ can leave a metal spontaneously;
in the classical picture they evaporate. In 1908, Richardson deduced
from measurements a formula for the temperature dependence of the
saturation current i which is obtained when the released electrons are
drawn off by a sufficiently high electric field.
His result is the famous Richardson equation,
(7-15)
A is a constant of the metal which is theoreti-
FIG.
208.
Potential-well
cally equal to 60 if the current density is com-
model of & metal.
Ф =
effective work function, o
puted in amperes per square centimeter of the
= work function for elec-
incandescent surfave. However, for the large
trons in the lowest energy
state
of
the
conduction
number of materials investigated, the value of
band, & = Fermi surface =
A varies between 10-s and 10, if the value of
zero-point energy of the
electrong
in the highest
the normal work function is used for . This
occupied electron levels.
discrepancy is expluined by the fact that actu-
ally the work function @ of different materials
changes in different ways with the temperature. However, customarily
the measurements are represented by the expression (7-15) with constant
Ф, but different A. The Richardson equation has been derived by
Schottky, Dushman, and others from the classical theory, before the
advent of the quantum theory, on the basis of a normal evaporation of
the electrons from the heated metal.
Compared to the exponential term e /kT
', where @ is the elfective
work function, the term 7' is rather unimportant. It seems elear
that the electron current has to be proportional to the term c-4/T
because this quantity gives the fraction of the electrons which have at
the temperature T the cnergy &. The quantum-mechanical derivation
from the electron theory of metals leads to exactly the same equation.
Since the work function & occurs in the exponent of Richardson's
equation, a slight reduction in the work function causes a luge increase
in the number of emitted electrons. The effective work functions for
several technologically important metals are listed in Table 16.
Table 16. The Work Function of Severul Melals
Metal....
Cs
BiL
Th
W
Pt.
@ electron (volts)..
1.8
2.1
3.35
1.5
6.2


===== PDF PAGE 0457 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 447
We see that the variation in the work function corresponds to that
of the ionization potential of the atoms forming the metal. Cesium,
for example, has the smallest work function and likewise the smallest
ionization potential of all elements (see Table 2, page 30). This rela-
tion might be expected from the quantum theory, since the work func-
tion (actually not t, but Po) can be regarded as the ionization energy of
the atom when influenced by the crystal latties.
The strong dependence of the thermionic emission on the work func-
tion is used widely in technical applications. Since the cathode cannot
be made of pure cesium, barium, or thorium for various technological
reasons, tungsten, which can withstand high temperatures, is used.
However, its work function is lowered by depositing on it a layer of
cesium or thorium, monatomic, if possible, which results in a large in-
crease of the thermionic clectron emission. In the first method, the
tungsten cathode is operated in a rarefied cesium vapor atmosphere, by
which a monatomic cesium layer is formed on the tungsten. To produce
the thorium costing, in the manulacturing process the lungsten is mixed
with thorium oxide and this is reduced by heating so that the thorium
diffuses toward the surface, thus producing a monatomic thorium lover
on the tungston. This thorialed tungsten cathode has the great advantage
that it can be used in high vacuum. Surprisingly, by properly coating
the tungsten with t's or 'Th atoms, a work finetion is obtained which
is only slightly higher then 0.7 or 20 es, respectivoly, sund thus is
noticcably less than that of pure metallic cosium or thorium.
This can
be explained by the atomic theory and is confirmed by experimont as
being clue to the faced that the C's and Th adome adsorbed on the lungslen
surfae are polarized with the positive pole of the rosulting dipol
directed toward the tungston sartare. In this way the positive chings
is stronger and the negative doctron cloud less lightly bound than for
symmotrical binding. The separation of an cectron from this type of
adsorbed atoms therefore requires an amount of enorgy smaller than tho
normal ollective work function. This phonomoron is an excellent ex-
ample of the atomistic explanation d even complicated details of it
technically important diet.
Another application of the model of the potential woll is the liokd
emission of cectrons from cold motals. No is the phenomenon that at
electrio field strongths abore some million colle por contimeter doctrons
are emitted from cold metals. such high lolds deer particularly near
sharp points of clectrodes. The effect of told emission, therefore, seems
to play an importand role for the initiation of certain dopes of spark
If we discuss dickd mission by means of the potential woll model,
we have to superimpose on the potential of the binding forces the


===== PDF PAGE 0458 =====

448
ATOMIC PHYSICS
potential of the strong external electric field. The result is the dis-
torted, asymmetrical shape of the potential well edges which is indicated
in Fig. 209. Such a potential distribution implies that the potential
of an electron on the positive side of the field outside the metal would
be smaller than inside the metal. Therefore, electrons can penetrate
the potential wall (tunnel effect) at the place indicated by the dotted
line and escape into free space. It should be noticed that this explana-
tion of field emission corresponds closely to the explanation of the
preionization of atoms (page 186) by a distortion of the potential curve
and tunnel effect. Since, according to page 236, the penetration prob-
ability increases
with decreasing
height and width of the potential
wall to be penetrated, one can draw
three interesting conclusions. First,
the field emission should increase
greatly with increasing field strength
because, as a result of distorting the
FIG. 209.
Distortion of the potential
wall in & strong electric field.
This
edge, the width of the potential wall
makes possible the field
emission of
is reduced. Second, with increasing
electrons from the metal by way of the
temperatures the number of escap-
tunnel effect (dotted arrow).
ing electrons should inercuse because
the electrons in the higher states (bands) in the potential well have lower
and thinner potential walls to penetrate (transition to thermionie emis-
sion). Third, similar to the case of thermionic emission, the field emission
should increase strongly, or begin at lower field strengths, if the effective
work function (i.e., the height of the potential wall to be penelrated) is
reduced by suitable adsorbed layers on the cathode surface.
The increase of field emission with increasing temperature does not.
seem to be of particular interest and has not been measured. The
increase with increasing field strength has been measured and found to
be in agreement with the expectation: the field emission inercases
exponentially with the field strength. Reliable quantitative mensure-
ments are difficult, because adsorhed surface layers and microscopic:
irregularities cause deviations from the expected behavior. For in-
stance, for thoriated tungsten, an appreciable fiekd emission has been
found for fields of 1 million volts/em, though theoretically fiekd emission
was not expected below 10' volts/cm. However, careful removal of all
surface layers and consequent outgassing of the electrode surface led
to a decrease of the field emission. The remaining discrepancy seems
to be due to the fact that the actual field strength near microscopic
peaks of the surface is larger than the computed one. Conclusive proof
for this has been recently found by electron-microscope measurements


===== PDF PAGE 0459 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS ON THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
449
of emitting metal points. The field emission of cold metals here actu-
ally was found to begin at 3 X 107 volts/em.
As a last example for the application of the potential well model we
discuss the contact potential between two different metals. Two metals
may be brought into contact and then slightly sepurated. Between
them, we can then meusure a potential dillerence, the contact voltage.
Each of the metals may be characterized by a potential well with
different values of o, Ф, and 6 (Pig. 210). If the two metals are in
contact, they have the same potential. This means that electrons
would flow from one to the other, until both electron surfaces have the
same height, is it is indicated in Fig. 210. However, now an electron
at the surface of metal ll has & higher
potential energy than one at the surface
of metal I, because the work function of
metal ll in our example is larger than
that of metal I. The dilterence of the
potential energies of these clectrons is
just the potential difference between the
Fi. 210.
Pxplanation of the coon-
taet potential between two different
two surfaces, io., the contact voltage.
motale I and lI.
Its value is evidently equal to the difter-
ence of the elective work functions of the two metals. This contact
voltage exists also betacon the twosoparated motals. Because of the dif-
erence of the work functions, more clectrons will leave the metal I than IT,
until the two metals have a potential difference which prevents further
electron curront. Again we arrive at the result that the contact vollage
is @, minus de. This theorical result. is in agreement with experiment,
provided that the mensurements are made with extremely clean and
outgassed metal surfaces.
In most cases, surlace lavers of various
kinds cause complications. It is obvious that, conversoly, the effect of
such surtace layers, loose contacte, ete, can ho sudied by means of
analogous considorations with potontial woll modols. This has been
done successfully and is of interest for doctrical ongincering.
7-11. Ferromagnetism as a Crystal Property
Ferromagnetism is one of the crystal properties which has been
explained by quantum mechanies. That it is actually a property of the
crystal and not of the single atoms follow's from the fact that, for example,
iron vapor or iron compounds do not eshibit. ferromagnetian (se page
162), whereas the Houser alloys formed from the nonferrous motil
copper, manganese, and aluminam are ferromagnotic. Moreover, i-
tain unmagnotic crystals can be made forromagnetic just by changing
their lattice structures.


===== PDF PAGE 0460 =====

450
ATOMIC PHYSICS
The most remarkable property of ferromagnetic materials is that even
a very small external magnetic field produces a large magnetization.
Moreover, the magnetization does not increase steadily by increasing
the field. A large-scale picture of the hysteresis curve (Fig. 211) shows
that the magnetization increases in discontinuous steps, the so-called
Barkhausen steps. This stepwise, large increase of the magnetization
under the influence of a comparatively weak external magnetic field
can be explained only by the assumption that even without an external
field entire crystal domains are mag-
netized (spontaneous magnetization)
and that the magnetic field only
serves to overcome the resistance.
4
which prevents the instantaneous
orientation of the magnetic domains
in the direction of the external field.
How can we explain this strong
- 5 - 4
-3
-2
50e spontaneous
magnetization of
whole regions in & ferromagnetic
substance even without an external
field? It can only result from the
parallel orientation of the magnetic
moments of all on' almost all con-
duction electrons of the highest
occupied band in the individual
Fru, 211. Magnetization curve with Bark- domains in the metal under con-
hausen steps. (After Becker and Döring.)
sideration. Normally, according
to page 439, each state, characterized by the quantum number ki, of
the highest energy band is occupied by 2 electrons. According to
the Pauli principle (page 169) these two electrons must have opposite
spins so that their magnetic moments compensate each other. Now if
all magnetic moments are oriented in the same sense, then cach k state
can be occupied by only one electron. Then for the sume number of
electrons twice as many l states are required as in the nonferromagnetic
case. This number of l' states is available in metals, because their high-
est energy hands are generally only half-filled (page 443). However,
the elections must, on the average, now occupy higher hi states of the
conduction hand than normally, so that their average zero-point energy
is higher too. Now such a spin orientation can occur spontaneously
only if energy is gained in the process. This means that the energy
gain due to the parallel orientation of the spin momenta must overcom-
pensate the increase in the average zero-point energy of the conduction
electrons.


===== PDF PAGE 0461 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 451
The answer to the problem of how a parallel urientation of the spin
momenta can occur and lead to a lower potential energy of the system
than the normal state of antipurallel spin momenta, was given by
Heisenberg in a famous application of quantum mechanics. According
to page 231, the energy of interaction of two electrons 1 and 2 which
may belong to the ions a and l, consists of an electrostatic part
which is independent of the spin orientation, and the exchange energy
which depends on the mutual spin orientation. It is positive or negative
depending on whether the exchange integral
(7-16)
1u2
Ты
r1,2,
is positive or negative. Thus, if this exchange integral of the cigen-
functions of electrons with spin in the same direction is positive, then this
ferromaguetie state of the crustal is energelically more foorable than the
nonmagnetic slate with compensating magnetic moments. From (7-16) it
can be scon that a will be positive if the average distaned between the
two interacting dectrons, rie, is small and the distances between the
nuclei and electrons ree and ra are lage. Accordingly we expect, after
Slater, a spontaneous orientation of the spin moments of the quasi-
free electrons in a crystal, il two conditions are fulfilled:
1. The atoms forming the crystal must not have closed sholly, so
that the spin momenta of the external coctions are not mutually
compensated. Parthermore, these doctrons should decupy a state of
high orbital quantum number in which the electrons de relatively
far from their nuclei.
2. The radius of the doctron sholl must be small compared to the
lattice distance, since only then the integral over the produed of the
electron cigenfunctions divided by me has a large valur.
Condition 1 is fulfilled for all transition metals in the periodic table,
whereas condition 2 holds only for the ree carths and the group, iron,
cobalt, and nickel. Though the exchange integral is positive for the
rue carths, its value is so small that coon a slight thermal agitation is
able to counteract the spontancons orientation of the spin magnols in
the crystal.
The crystals of the morearth clomonts thus are forro
magnetic only in the neighborhood of absolude soro. Their C'urio
points, above which their ferromagnetism disappears, is far below
room temperature. Only for the metals iron, cobalt, and nickel is the
exchange integral large enough to cause a very stable spontancons orion-
lation of the spin momenta. Only these metals therefore are terro
magnetic up to their fairly high c'arie points of 360 to 1000°C: Figur
212 shows the value of the exchange intogral a 07-16) with its dopend-


===== PDF PAGE 0462 =====

452
ATOMIC PHYSICS
ence on the ratio of the interatomic distance to the radius of the unclosed
electron shell. This explanation of ferromagnetism by the atomic
theory is confirmed by the fact that ferromagnetism can be produced
by increasing the lattice distance of the nonmagnetic metal manganese.
According to Fig. 212, its exchange integral is only slightly negative
and becomes positive if we increase the interatomic distance by in-
corporating nitrogen, i.e., by converting the metal to manganese nitride.
A detailed discussion of the behavior of the various modifications
(lattice structures) of iron by Dehlinger revealed that apparently not
only the exchange energy between an atom and its immediate neighbors
Paramagnetic
Ferro-
substances
magnetic
Rare earths
substances,
CoNi
A
5
6
Mn
VE.
Internuclear distance
Radius of unfilled electron shell
FiG. 212. Curve giving the value of the exchange intogral (which determinos ferromag-
netism and Curie point) for a number of ferromagnotic or nearly ferromagnetic metals as
a function of the ratio of interatomic distance to the radius of the incompleto electrou
shell. (After Becker and Döring.)
is of importance. Because the outer electrons of metals are not well
localized (see page 432) or, in other words, because the eigenfunctions
are extended over the volume of many atoms, the interaction between
& particular atom and its more distant neighbors has to be taken into
account and may determine whether, in a particular case, parallel
spins are to be expected or not. Consequently, a parallel orientation of
the spin momenta of the conduction electrons, and thus ferromagnetism,
is to be expected if the exchange integral obtained by summing the
exchange integrals between an arbitrary atom and all other atoms of
the lattice is positive. With this refinement not only the magnetic
behavior of the various modifications of iron can he understood, but also
the complicated behavior of the many magnetic alloys which have been
discovered in the past 20 years.
The spontaneous magnetization (without an external field) of ver-
tain crystals can thus be understood on the basis of the atomic theory.
That a piece of iron in general is not magnetic without an external field,
is due to the fact that this spontaneous magnetization occurs only in
small crystal domains of 100 to 10,000 atoms diameter, und these
elementary domains are usually oriented completely at random in the


===== PDF PAGE 0463 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
453
crystal. An external magnetic field is thus required in order to orien-
tate the domains. That such an orientation is possible means that
these elementary domains can be rotated in the solid crystal though
they offer some resistance against an arbitrary rotation. This peculiar
crystal property has been studied carcfully by measuring the hysteresis
curves of single crystals of iron. For these studies the external mag-
netic field was directed along an edge, along a surface diagonal or the
volume diagonal of the rubic iron crystal. Figure 213 shows the results.
If the magnetic field acted along i
2000
cube edge (100), the magnetization
increased rapidly with increasing
1750
1oo]
- Ms-
orienting lickd to the saturation
value M.. Evidently only a very
[110]
1500
small orienting foree is sufficient to
turn the spontaneously magnetized
M 1250
----M
domains in the direction of the cube
edge. If the direction of the liold
1000
coincided with a surface diagonal
(110), the magnetization increased
750
rupidly up to the value 1,v2, and
with the field in the direction of the
500g
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
cube diagonal (111), up to the value
D'1. 21:3.
Magnotization curves of an iron
Me/V3. 1. then rose slowly 10 1l6
mingle crystal for oriontation of the fold in
saturation value 1. This behavior
dittoron crystal directiona. Cilfler Hola
and Kaya.)
is understandable it it. is assumed
that all spontancously magnolized domains do not offer any appreciable
resistance against being rotated in the direction of the cube edge closest.
to the field direction, but that it requires more foree to barn the spins
from this preferred direction into the actual field diretion. After the
external field has been romoved, the domains will reoriont themselves in
the direction of the marest cube edge and will remain there if the thermal
agitation is not. too great. This is the explanation of the well-known
romanent magnotism.
For the usual polycrystalline iron, and particularly for iron is it. is
treated in many manufacturing processes, the bohavior is much more
complicated than for singh crystals. This is chiotly beens the inner
stresses produced in working the iron givo rise do preferred directions
of orientation for the domains. However, een here the compliented
phenomena of ferromagnetism can be understood in principle from the
well-known rules of atomic physios.
Recontly the intoresting question has been studied how large a le
microcrystal must be in order to exhibit. ferromagnotism (in contrast,


===== PDF PAGE 0464 =====

454
ATOMIC PHYSICS
to the Fe atom). According to the experiments of König the micro
crystal must have at least 64 elementary cells (page 425). If the surface
atoms which are not essential for the spin orientation are disregarded,
this number reduces to 8, i.e., to a body which also seems to play a
special role as a crystal seed.
Here we have apparently arrived at the
borderline between atomic complexes and solid bodies, i.e., micro-
crystals.
One more important property of metals should be mentioned at this
point, though it cannot yet be explained by atomic physics: supra-
conductivity (page 445). This strange effect also depends on a special
FIG. 214. Positive interstitial ions and vacant lattice places in an ionic crystal: Frenkel
defects.
electron orientation and apparently, just as ferromagnetism, is possible
only in certain crystal lattices. It seems that, because of a special "con-
figuration," the conduction electrons can move through the supra-
conducting metallic lattice practically without any resistance. Since
there is no satisfactory atomic explunation for this important and
highly interesting phenomenon, we have not devoted a special section
to it, but only mention it in concluding the discussion of ferromagnetisi
which also depends on a special electron orientation in certain crystal
lattices.
7-12. Lattice Defects and Their Bearing on Diffusion and
Ionic Conduction in Crystals
Ferromagnetism and supraconductivity seem to be structure-sensitive
properties (see page 122) in so far as a particular lattice is necessary for
these phenomena. We shall now discuss those properties of solids
which, like diffusion and ionie conductivity, depend essentially on
lattice defects. In an ideal crystal each constituent is in its own poten-


===== PDF PAGE 0465 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
455
tial trough and any migrution of a particle for example, the exchange
in the location of two particles (utoms, ions, or molecules according to
the lattice type, page 423) in the case of spontaneous diffusion— requires
energy in order to overcome the potential wall. Spontaneous diffusion
therefore is strongly temperature dependent. Because it increases
exponentially with the temperature, it is difficult to observe at room
temperature.
According to page t22, each reul crystal hus a large number of lattice
Po. 215. Positivo and mogative varant lattico placew: Nolottky deforto.
defects, such as vacant. latlier places which would normally be decupied
by a constituent, and the so-called interstitial ions. During the growth
of the crystal, scording do Vig. 211, a normal lattice ion can errone-
ously" be "frozen" in an interstitial place, ir., il die not get into its
right potential trough bud, bo deformation of the crystal, has made
a place for ilsold in the noighborhood of the correed place. By this
process there is produced in the crystal an omply place und in interstitial
ion. This apo of defeed is called a frenel defeel. Also during erystal
growth or by subsequent migration, ions of both signa (since the crystal
is deerically nontral may have come to the crystal suriace; emply
places thon romain in the crystal (rig. 215). Thoro defects are called
Scholly defels. Both types di deleede onablo lattiee constituente to
have a much greater mobilily, sinee with lallice holes the dillusion can
progress slpmise through the lallice holes. This is calledd hole diffusion,
and the process is called defect conduction. Obviously much loss itiva-


===== PDF PAGE 0466 =====

456
ATOMIC PHYSICS
tion energy is required for hole migration or the motion of interstitial
ions than for an exchange of normal ions in a lattice. Since the number
of lattice defects depends on the incidentally more or less regular crystal
growth and its later treatment (heating, mechanical stress, etc.), the
defect diffusion varies greatly between different samples of the same type
of crystal. This behavior is in contrast to the characteristic high temper-
ature diffusion mentioned above, which is independent of lattice defects.
The study of the diffusion of atoms or ions in their own crystal, for
instance of lead atoms in lead metal, has become possible, as mentioned
on page 309, by the radioactive tracer method (diffusion of radioactive
atoms or ions). The diffusion of two solid materials into cach other,
when in contact, e.g., that of silver into gold and conversely, is one of
the migration phenomena which is easier to study. At low temper-
atures the diffusion in solids is exclusively due to vacant lattice places
and interstitial atoms. However, it is obvious that this migration
process is also strongly temperature-dependent. With increasing tem-
perature higher and higher lattice vibrations are excited and lead to a
"loosening up" of the lattice which facilitates the migrution of lattice
constituents. It is, finally, understandable that the velocity of diffusion
of one solid into another is the larger, the less the differenee in the diame-
ters of the two kinds of atoms. An occasionally very high concentration
of lattice defects plays an essential role in the semiconductors and phos-
phors which we shall discuss in detail later. In these crystals, either
one of the lattice constituents is present in excess (e.g., Zn in Zn(),
or foreign atoms are introduced into the lattice (so-called impurity-
activated crystals). In both cases we find interstitial atoms as well as
lattice vacancies.
It is evident that gas atoms or ions can also diffuse into solids. The
diffusion of hydrogen through palladium and iron, to cite only two
prominent examples, is well known to gas discharge physicists.
The great importance of diffusion processes for the practical use of
metals becomes apparent from the example of rusting of iron. As soon
as metallic iron is covered by a layer of rust, it is no longer possible for
oxygen or OH radicals to attack the metal since this is now protected by
a layer of another solid, rust. Further rusting is possible only by dilfu-
sion of either oxygen or metal through the crystalline lover of rust.
Because of the smaller radi of the positive ions it seems that the diffu-
sion of the iron ions to the surface of the rust layer is more important
than the reverse diffusion of oxygen. The number of similar examples
can be increased arbitrarily.
We have not taken into consideration up to now that the lattice
constituents of an ionic lattice are ions of opposite polarity. Thus, if


===== PDF PAGE 0467 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 457
we apply un electric field to un ionic crystal, its ions migrato to the
electrodes of opposite sign, so that ionic crystals exhibit an electric
conductivity which is ionic just as is the conductivity in electrolytic
solutions. It is obvious that this ionic conductivity has nothing to do
with the migration of electrons and the corresponding electronic con-
ductivity in certain crystals (semiconductors) which we shall discuss
later. Because the ionic conductivity depends on the migration of
lattice ions, we have the empirically well known negative temperature
coefficient, of resistance of ionic crystals: the resistanee decreases with
increasing temperature, borause the lattice loosens up. At low temper-
atures the ionic conductivity is strongly structure-dependent, and the
migration occurs almost coclusively via the vacancies and interstitial
lattice places. At high temporalures, on the other hand, the structure
dependency ranishes and, because of the loosening of the lattice, the ions
migrate by exchanging places in the hellice.
That the ionic conductivity increwser exponentially with the temper-
ature is to be expected for an exchange of places by overcoming potential
walls. For a particular sample of a Nal crystal, according to Smckal,
the conductivity could be represented by the formula
0 = 1.1e 100,0010, 1 + 1000 .-21,0000/'T
(7-17)
The difference in the order of magnitude of the constants, 0.1 and 109,
shows that only the 109 part of the lattice constituents participates in
the conductivily ropresented by the first form. This term consequently
deseribes the conductivity due to lattice detects. The second term repre-
sents the conductivily rosulting from the migration of normal lattier
ions. In agreement with this explanation the activation enorgy of the
defect conduction is only 10 per cont of that of the scond term (10,000
to 24,000. The arorage height of the potential walls for both processes
is 0.8 and 2.0ev, respootivoly. Because of the small height of the polen-
tial wall (activation enorgy) in the exponent, the fire derm of the con-
ductivity formula prodominates at low comporatures in spite of the
small numerical factor, whereas at high leaporatures the second term,
because of its large factor, predominates. Since, in the generol case,
holes, interstitial ions, and normal ions of both signs contribute to the
conductivity, the demperature depondenes of the conductivity of ionic
erystals should be ropresented by a formula with four lorms. Pranti-
cally, however, il can be represented by two terms. Because of the
difterent ativation onorgies of the various partners and the limited
tomperature regions in which it is toasible to make measuremonts,
only two terms play an important role, unless the accuracy of the mess
urements is increased considerably.


===== PDF PAGE 0468 =====

458
ATOMIC PHYSICS
7-13. Light Absorption and Electron Motion in Halide Crystals.
The Primary Photographic Process
In the last section we were concerned with the movement of lattice
constituents as well as of foreign atoms or ions in the crystal lattice and
learned of the decisive influence of lattice defects on this migration.
We shall now discuss the effect of light on ionic crystals, and here we
shall deal for the first time with the migration of clectrons in nonmetallic
crystals. The fundamental investigations on the effect of light on ionic
crystals were carried out by Pohl, Hilsch, and coworkers on "colored"
F'
+
FO
FIG. 216.
Schematic representation of the probable nature of F and F' conters in colored
alkali-halide crystals: one or two electrons in the lattice pluce of a missing nogative ion.
alkali-halide crystals. In addition to their general interest, they are
important for understanding the fundamental processes of photography.
If transparent alkali-halide crystals are irradiated with sufhcently
short ultraviolet light, with X- or cathode rays, or if they are heated in
the vapors of their characteristic metals (c.g., NaCl in Na vapor), the
crystals become colored. The characteristic color for each crystal
varies, for instance, from yellow for LiCl to blue for CaCl. The absorp-
tion band corresponding to this color, which is missing in the untreater
crystal, has been called the F band (Farb band or color band) by lohl.
The corresponding absorhing centers are called I centers. It required
many years of intensive studies to explain the nature of these F centers,
and it is not possible to present here all the experiments which support.
the presently accepted explanation. According to our present knowl-
edge, an F center is not, as was formerly believed, simply a metal atom
produced by attaching a free electron to an arbitrary metal ion of the
lattice. An E center seems to consist of an electron which has laken the
place of a missing negative halogen ion (Fig. 216) and then, as a non-


===== PDF PAGE 0469 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
459
localized electron (page 415), alternatingly forms an absorbing Na atom
with each of the six surrounding Na ions. Its excitation energy of about
3 volts, as computed by wave mechanics, agrees well with the wave
length of its absorption band. To ionize an i center, i.e., to release the
electron from its potential well, an energy about 0.1 volt higher than its
excitation energy is required. The following experiment is in agreement
with this result: If a colored crystal at a sufficiently low temperature is
irradiated with the wavelength of its absorption
band, then the I clectron exrited by the absorp-
2-228 тр
tion remains bound to its pluce and the crystul
thus remains an insulator. On the other hand,
at elevated temperatures the energy lacking for
+
the complete release of the l electron is supplied
by the thermal vibrations of the lattice und the
I electron is raised to the previously unoccupied
conduction band. Here, is a fred electron, it is
responsible for electronic conductivity if an clec-
tric field is applied to the crystal (Fig. 217); the
FIG.
217.
Diagrain
of
crystal exhibits "photococtrie conductivily."
the Pohl
experiment for
Pohl furthermore found that the destruction
the olectric measurement
of the cloetron migration
of # conters by irruliating in the D band il not
in a colored
KH - KBr
mixed crystal.
By ultri-
too low temperatures produced not. only the ex-
violet.
irradiation
aler-
pected reduction of the absorption intensity of
trons are liberated and
the d band, but also the appearnee of a now
migrate in the doctric
field from one varant
longer wave absorption hand which he called fe
negative hole to the othor
band. The nature of these A contors which are
toward
the anode, thus
establishing an
electric
responsible for this longwave absorption has
ounvertion curront.
been explained in the following way: the f
center as supposed lo be an l center that has captured an ultitional electron
(Mig. 216), or, in other words, lee instrut of one deetron in the place of
one missiny Cl ion. The absorption of the De bands lies at longer
wavelengths than that of the f bands, because it requires only a small
amount of enorgy to separate the loosely bound second electron. The
formation of l contens acording to the present explanation seems
clear: an # dectron, released from its potential trough by the absorp-
tion of light. with the cooperation of the thermal lattice energy, is cap-
tured by another conter whish is then transformed into an A conter.
In agreement with this explanation, too l conters are destroyed for
each quantum absorbed in an l band (quantum viold 2). (one is de-
stroyed directly by absorption and one is transformed into an I center.
The fact that the moan free paths of the photoclectrons released from
the I centers is invorsoly proportional to the density of I centers is


===== PDF PAGE 0470 =====

460
ATOMIC PHYSICS
further direct confirmation of the explanation of the f' centers as pre-
sented here. Furthermore, in general it is not possible to produce more
than 1018 F centers per cubic centimeter in a crystal. This is further
evidence in favor of the present theory, because in general it is not
possible to form more F centers than there are Cl vacancies. Conse-
quently, the production of F centers consists in the introduction of free
electrons into the halogen vacancies in the lattice. The free electrons are
produced by the absorption of ultraviolet light or X-rays or by collisions
of cathode-ray electrons. If the coloration is pro-
duced by heating the crystal in metal vapor, the
metal ions attach themselves to the crystal surface
(together with halogen ions which migrate outward
and thus produce vacant lattice places), while only
their electrons migrate into the crystal.
That actu-
FIG. 218.
Pohl's
experiment by which
ally an electron migration into the crystal produces
the
migration of
electrong in an al-
the f centers, and thus the coloration, was shown by
kali-halide crystal is
Pohl in his famous electrical experiment. If a poten-
made visible.
At
tial difference of several hundred volts is put across
600°C the electrons
in & KBr crystal
a completely transparent KBr crystal and the lattice
migrate so quickly
"loosened" by raising the temperature to 400 to
toward the positive
pole that the rear
600°C, then electrons migrute from the negative
boundary
of
the
electrode into the crystal and fall into 1r vauncies,
"blue cloud" formed
by the F centers
thus producing absorbing E centers. A blue cloud
moves visibly
to
ward
the
anode.
can be seen moving into the crystal, which can be
(After Pohl.)
moved back and forth as the polarity of the clectric
field is reversed (Fig. 218). Pohl called this produc-
tion of F centers by introducing electrons into the crystal "aditive
coloration" in contrast to the coloration of crystals by irruliating them
with X-rays. In this last case the electrons can return to their original
places when the crystal is heated or irradiated with visible light. The
crystal can be bleached, in contrast to an additively colored crystel. All
these experiments with alkali-halide crystals have not only revealed a
number of interesting processes in solids but they have also clearly
shown that lattice defects are of decisive importance for the alects of light
on ionic crystals and the behavior of electrons in such crystals.
The same situation holds for the basic atomic processes of photog-
raphy which are so complicated because of this structure dependency.
Free electrons are primarily produced by absorption of light in the
AgBr microcrystals of the photographic emulsion just as in the alkali-
halide crystals. After filling the lattice vacancies, these electrons attach
themselves to Agt ions and form absorbing Ag atoms. The decisive
but not yet entirely understood process is now that the individual Ag


===== PDF PAGE 0471 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
461
atoms coagulate and form colloidal-like silver nuclei. After the develop-
ment of the "latent" image, i.e., after the chemical reduction of further
Ag atoms, these silver nuclei cause a blackening in the plate at those
places which had been irradiated.
Theoretically, in producing the latent image, each absorbed photon
can release one electron which attaches itself to an ion and forms a
silver atom. This quantum yield of 1 can actually be obtained in the
elementary photographic process according to measurements of Eggert
and Noddack. In general, the quantum yield depends on the illumina-
tion during the exposure since too strong exposures produce a reforma-
tion of AgBr which reduces the ellective quantum yiell.
That the aldition of casily ionizable molecules, such as AgeS, in-
creases the sensitivity of the photogriphic emulsion can be understood
without further discussion. It is also clear that a certain minimum
energy is necessary to seporale the electron from the halogen ion. This
energy determines the wavelength limit beyond which the emulsion is
no longer sensitive. Photographic emulsions are always sensitive to
shortwave light but, in general, they are not sensitive to longwave red
light. It is known, however, that photogrophic emulsions can be sensi
tized for longwave light, by adding certain dyes which are able to
absorb longwave light.
Although one has boon able to explain to a certain extent the clemen-
tary photographic process, one cannot yet. fully explain the develop-
ment of the latend image. It is known that the number of primary
Ag atoms which form the ladent. image is increased by a factor up to
108 by chemical reduction of silver doms, and that the existence of
silver nuclei is necessary for this chemical desclopment. Yet nothing
definite is known shout their structure of eftects. In particular, it is
not yet known whether the nuclous consists of colloidal silver or, is
many investigators believe, regularly build micelles
; in which foreign
atoms play in important. role.
The atomic physicist is still looking
forward to more complete empirical results.
7-14. Electronic Conduction in Semiconductors and Related
Phenomena. Barrier Layers and Rectification,
Crystal Photoeffect. The Transistor
In the last section we boone aquined with the clockronic son-
ductivity of insulating crystals which deponds upon the motion of free
electrons. These were produced, ir., raised to the normally unoccupied
conduction hand, by the absorption of light in the crystal. In some
solids electrons cam le raised lo the conduction band not only by the absorp-
tion of light but also by the thermal vibrations of the tellier, is the lemper-


===== PDF PAGE 0472 =====

462
ATOMIC PHYSICS
ature is not too low. This gives rise to a "dark conductivity." These
materials are called semiconductors.
By definition a semiconductor is & crystal which is an insulator at
absolute zero but which, at higher temperatures, has an electronic
conductivity that increases exponentially with the temperature. In
order to determine whether the conductivity is the result of the migra-
tion of electrons and not of ionic diffusion, the Hall effect is used. In
Fig. 219 an electric field is applied in the y direction of a semiconductor
Magnetic field H
Hall
potential
Current I
Plate
thickness
d
FIG. 219. Schematic sketch of the arrangement for meauring the Hall voltage of semi-
conductors.
slab lying in the xy-plane, and a magnetic field acts in the a-direction.
Because of their mobility, the electrons moving along the y-direction
are then deviated by the magnetic field in the x-direction.
The result
is a potential difference, the so-called Hall potential, perpendicular to
the direction of the current. This potential difference can be observed
only in the case of electronic conductivity, hut not for conduction by
ions, because, according to Sec. 7-12, the ion mobility is too small.
The Hall effect thus can be used to distinguish between semiconductors and
ionic conductors.
Electronic conductivity in a nonmetallic solid (semiconductor) thus is
due to electrons which are relcased by thermal lattice vibrations (similar
to thermal collisions) and raised to the conduction band which is unoccupied
at T .= 0. This is possible in the case of a pure crystal only if the cnergy
difference between the normally empty and the normally filled energy
hands is not too large compared with the thermal energy kiT", i.o., if it is
at most several tenths of a volt in comparison with the 2 to 10 volts in
most crystals. Such a crystal with a small gap between the two hands •


===== PDF PAGE 0473 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 463
(e.g., germanium with a gap of 0.75 volt) is called an intrinsic semi-
conductor. A crystal which is not an intrinsic semiconductor can be
made into a semiconductor (and this is by far the most frequent case)
by introducing into it foreign atoms, or a stoichiometric excess of one
of the component atoms which has a sufficiently small ionization energy
in the crystal. In the energy band model this means that, according to
Fig. 220, the energy states D) of the valence electrons of these interstitial
atoms are situated so closely below the normally unoccupied conduction
band B, that electrons can get from l) into the band B as a result of
the thermal ionization of the metal atoms. This type of crystal is called
Conduction
band
B
(normally
empty)
Donor levels
_ D
Filled
band
Fro. 220. The onorgy hand dingram for an Nelypo nomiconductor: A = filled energy
band; B= empty conduction band; and 1) & impurity levels of "donor atoms," from
which cloctrons on emily ronch the conduction bond B.
un excess semiconductor, becauso it requires an excess of metallic ions in
the lattice do provide the doctrons, or an N-upe semiconductor because
negative charges ar roleased from the Do lorols. The D levols occasion-
ally are called donor lerols, becauso they donate the conduction cleotrons.
The third possible type of semiconductor is called the Paupe on defect
semiconductor bocauso it has a defort of motallio atoms in the ladiee or
an excess of the doctronegative constituonts (o.g., oxygon in the metal
oxide semiconductors).
The energy states of these deetronogative
atoms lie closely above the band it of the crystal which is completely
occupied by doctrons (Fig. 221). Only a small amount of cnorgy in
necessury to capture an doctron, ie, to bring it from the crystal onergy
band a to the normally moccupied lovoke d' of the dectronegative
doms, where it is hold fast. The "holes" which are thas produced in the
previously full band of the crystal have an effective positive charge und
are mobile. When a clotric liold is applied, a carront Hows which
apparently is conducted by positive charges positivo holes, therefore
Plype semiconledor. The doctronegative atoms in the C' levels arr
often called recoplor doms, because they receive the doctrons from the
filled band and thus cause the positive holes.


===== PDF PAGE 0474 =====

464
ATOMIC PHYSICS
The excess or defect semiconductors are also called reduction or
oxidation semiconductors, respectively, because
in the practically
important metal oxide semiconductors the excess of the metal or oxygen
atoms is produced by chemical reduction or oxidation. Consequently,
depending on the preliminary treatment, the same crystal can be an
excess or a defect semiconductor, a typical indication for the "structure
dependency" of the properties of a semiconductor. Examples of
Empty
conduction
band
Receptor
levels
Filled
A
band
FIG. 221. The energy-band diagram for a P-type semiconductor: A = filled energy band;
B = empty conduction band; and C' = empty impurity levels of "receptor atoms," which
can easily be filled from A, thus producing mobile positive holes in A.
intrinsic semiconductors are pure crystals of silicon and germanium
which have recently been extensively investigated. The most important
examples of practical excess and defect semiconductors are, respectively,
zine oxide, ZnO, which is heated in vacuum, and cuprous oxide, CnO,
heated in oxygen.
Since the energy required for the transition D → B (N type) or 1 → C
(P type) in the so-called dark conductivity of semiconductors is sup-
plied by thermal collisions, the conductivity can be represented by a
formula of the general form
• = Ap.-W/kT
(7-18)
in which W is the "activation energy" of the process (the energy
difference from D to B or A to (!) and is in general, just as is the constant
A, a function of the temperature, since W depends on the loosening of
the lattice which is determined by the temperature.
On the basis of this theory of semiconductivity, a large number of
phenomena of physics, many of which have been known for a very long
time, can now be explained. For instance, for many decades, barium
oxide cathodes have been used in many electronic instruments, because
it had been found that at a comparatively low temperature barium
oxide has a much higher thermionic electron emission than any metal.


===== PDF PAGE 0475 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
465
This is also a semiconductor effect. By the "formation" of the barium
oxide cathode, an excess of metal atoms is produced in the microcrystals,
and these excess metal atoms, being in the l) levels of Fig. 220, release
electrons into the conduction band B at a sufficiently high temperature.
Now the energy necessary to release these electrons from the con-
ductivity band B into free space (eflective work function of the semi-
conductor) is much smaller than that for their releuse from the normally
occupied bands of a metal. This reduced ellective work function appears
in the exponent in Richardson's equation (7-15) and thus causes, at the
B
— D
Conduction
band of
metal
Blocking
layer
Semiconductor
FIc. 222.
Enorgy-band diagram for an N-typo semiconductor in contact with & metal;
formation of a barrior lever with rectifior proportion.
sume temperature, an increase of the doctron omission by many orders
of magnitude, as compared with that of a motal.
The woll known rectifier and delector properties of numerous metal
oxide crystals are also semiconductor phenomena and can be explained
with the aid of the enorgy band diagram big. 220 or 221. If an N-type
semiconductor is brought into contact with a metal electrode, electrons
from the high impurity levols D "How down" into the metal, until the
clectric liold set up in the boundary layer causes such a distortion of the
energy bands (lig. 222) that further doctron current is impossible, it
least without an external lied. However, if an alternating electric
field is now applied across this metal-somiconductor contact, the enorgy
bande on the right side of Fig. 222 ar raisee and lowered, alternatingly,
with respect to the enorgy band of the metal clockrode at the loft.
Now with positive polarity of the moll doctrode, the bands of the
N-type semiconductor are raised to such an extont that cootons from
the 1) levols can again How down indo the motal. When the metal
electrode is negative, this is impossible, unless the potential applied to


===== PDF PAGE 0476 =====

466
ATOMIC PHYSICS
this "blocking layer" becomes too high. In this case the energy bands
of the semiconductor at the right side of Fig. 222 are lowered so much
that electrons from the metal can penetrate the blocking layer by the
tunnel effect (page 234) and flow into the B levels of the semiconductor.
Thus this theory requires an easy electron flow from the semiconductor
to the metal and a blocking of the current for flow in the opposite
direction. However, the resistance of the blocking layer with this
polarity should decrease with increasing applied potential.
This be-
havior has been found empirically and holds for most semiconductor
rectifiers with the exception that some of them (like cuprous oxide,
CuzO) are P-type semiconductors, so that we have to use Fig. 221 for
our discussion. The detector property of semiconducting crystals is,
of course, coupled with rectification and thus need not be treated
separately.
According to our above treatment, the decisive phenomenon of N-
type semiconductivity is the thermal release of electrons from the im-
purity levels D. However, the transitions D → B or A → C, which
lead to the production of free electrons or free positive holes, respec-
tively, in the semiconductor lattice, need not necessarily be caused
by thermal collisions (lattice vibrations), but they can also be caused by
light absorption. Consequently, all these semiconductors show weak,
longwave absorption hands which can he attributed to these transitions.
Absorption of the corresponding radiation by the alkali halides (page
459) produces an electric conductivity which, in contrast to dark
conductivity, is called photoconductivity. This relcuse of electrons
in the interior of semiconductors (and by shortwave light in other
crystals also) is called the "internal photoelectric effect."
Two different methods have been developed to make use of this
release of photoelectrons in semiconductors for the detection of radia-
tion. This radiation might cover the whole range from the infrared
(3 to 6 u with PhS, PbSe, and PbTe semiconductors) down to the y-rays.
Either the photoelectric conductivity of the semiconductor is measured
directly in a bridge as a function of the incident radiation, or semi-
conductor photocells are used which themselves produce a photocurrent
that is proportional to the number of incident photons. If, in dilterent.
layers of a semiconducting crystal, very different numbers of electrons
can be released photoelectrically, then we get a concentration gradient
of free electrons in the interior of the crystal. The crystal acts as an
electron-concentration element with an emf which, because of its origin,
is called a photo-emf. In CuzO the photo-emf can amount to as much
as 0.4 volt.
If a semiconductor is placed between two metal contarts
and these are connected to a microammeter, & photocurrent flows when


===== PDF PAGE 0477 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 467
the crystal is irradiated by light: we then huve a semiconductor photo-
element. These have become important for lux meters and other tech-
nical applications. The necessary election concentration gradient can
be obtained in two different ways. First, varying concentrations of
lattice defects in different layers of the semiconductor can be produced
by proper heat treatment, so that varying amounts of electrons are
released when the crystal is irradiated. Second, a crystal can be
selected which has layers so thick that the incident light will be strongly
absorbed. Then many elcetrons will be released close to the upper
surface where the illumination is strong, whereas on the lower side the
number of released electrons will be
Transparent
small because only a small portion
metal film
of the light reaches it. Techni-
cally, the first type of photocle
ment is preferred.
Light
The basic processes of this
phenomenon have been carefully
studied, in particular for cuprous
oxide (a P-lype semiconductor)
*-Photosensitive
where the necessary (' levol (Vig.
semiconducting layer
221) are due to excess oxygen
Metal base
atoms in the C'ugl) lattice. This is
Pra. 223. Diagram of a burrior layer
photocell with doctric circuit.
occasionally described in a partial
chemical transformation of (ug) do Cud) by tempering in an oxygen
atmosphere. By this temperiny the photocoric conductirity of pure (ingl
can easily he increased by right powers of ten! It a thin layer with only
a few excess atoms and thus a high insulation (harrier layer or blocking
layer) is formed on a crystal lover of good conductivity, and if over these
a thin transparont metallic dectrode is placed, we have a semiconducter
photoclement or barrier layer photoclement (Pig. 223). A similar widely
used photoelemont. has beon developed using solenium, but little seems
to be known about its basic alomic processes.
We have briefly discussed above the origin of the internal photo-emi.
Actually the theorolical problem of the photocomonts is much more
complicated, because the processes in the barrier layers, which are
formed at the contacts botwoon motal and somiconductor, have to le
taken into consideration. We have pointed out some of there barrier
layer probloms above in our discussion of the rectification properties
of semiconductors.
We mention linally one of the most recent developmonts in the field
of semiconductivily which combines sciontifie interest with practical
importance. It is the so-called transister, devoloped in the Bell Tele-


===== PDF PAGE 0478 =====

468
ATOMIC PHYSICS
phone Laboratories by Bardeen and Brattain. The transistor is essen-
tially a germanium crystal diode for current amplification. Figure 224
shows the schematic diagram. A small germanium crystal rests on
a metal base, whereas two point contacts touch its surface at a distance
of 0.05 to 0.25 mm from each other.
A current of the order of 1 ma
flows in the emitter circuit. As a surface layer of 10- cm thickness of
the crystal is a P-type semiconductor, positive holes are emitted from
the positive point contact. A part of this hole current, which is modu
lated with the frequency of the signal to be amplified, reaches the negative
collector point and changes its current-voltage characteristic. It is known
Emitter-
collector
Signal
Germanium crysta
¿Metal
base
FIG. 224. Electric circuit for the transistor. (After Bardeen and Brattair.)
that in the surface layer of the germanium a barrier layer exists which
prevents the flow of electrons from the metal contact into the crystal.
The space charge in the barrier layer under the collector point now is
changed by the positive holes from the emiller in such a way that the col-
lector current is increased or reduced with the signal frequency.
In addition to its probable future role in electronics, the transistor
is of interest because its theoretical explanation required a thorough
study of the semiconductor properties of germanium which, depending
on its treatment, its temperature, and the potential of its metal con-
tacts, shows conductivity due to electrons as well as holes. The electrons
and holes either come from the C and D levels, or from transitions be-
tween the filled band A or the conduction hand B, respectively, and the
conduction band of the metal in contact with the semiconductor.
For
further details the reader is referred to the literature. However, it is
clear from this brief discussion that physics of semiconductors has
become one of the most important fields of solid state physics.
1-15. Luminescence of Crystal Phosphors
The last important example of processes which depend essentially on
the microstructure in the crystal lattice is crystal luminescence, which
is closely related to semiconductivity. Many crystals show lumines-


===== PDF PAGE 0479 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
469
cence after irradiation with shortwave light, a-, B-, or y-rays, if they have
been "activated" by addition of a small percentage of metal atoms.
The term luminescence here comprises the phenomena of fluorescence
and phosphorescence. Fluorescence is the phenomenon of light emission
immediately after radiation has been absorbed in the crystal, ie., after
the normal period of 10-8 sec. Phosphorescence, on the other hand, is
the more complex process by which light of the same or longer wave-
length is emitted for a comparatively long time after irradiation. From
these definitions it is apparent that Auorescence und phosphorescence
are not always easy to distinguish. Physically, however, phosphores-
cence involves a storage of the absorbed energy before its remission. Lumi-
nescence can be observed in large single crystals: mostly, however, a
microcrystalline powder is used.
From what has been said so far, idul crystals are not luminescent.
However, certain crystals do show luminescence, particularly at low
temperatures, in spite of the fact that they apparently consist of chem-
ically pure homogeneous materials. These crystallize simultaneously in
different types of lattices, so that they contain lattice defects and in-
ternal surfaces which are essential for phosphorescence. All other
crystals with phosphoresconce al normal temperatures consist of a lallice
with interstitial or substilutional impurily atoms which serve as milling
centers. The best known crystal phosphors are sine and cadmium
sulfide, ZnS and Ces, which are used as single or mixed crystals, espe-
vially if they we activated by copper or manganese. There is approxi-
mately one emitting molal atom for every 10' lattice atoms. The oklest
phosphors which were investigated carefully by Lenard are the alkaline-
earth sulfides and oxides activated by On, Mn, Pb, or rare earths.
Certain silicates such a maid, activated by Mn, fluorspar, CaTa,
activated by heavy melals or rue earths, and numerous tungstates
activated by (r and Mu are also good phosphors. Of especial scientific
interest are the alkali halides with heavy metals and rare carths which
were investigated by Pohl and Hilseh, because, in contrast lo the above-
mentioned phosphors, they can be grown in large crystals and therefore
can be investigated under more perfect conditions.
The fundamental process of luminescence can be described in a few
words. By absorption of lighl an cretion leaves the highest occupied
energy bard of the basic lallice and onlors a higher moccupied band (con-
duction band). It then moves around in the lalier by thermal diffusion
until after a shorler or longer lime it comes lo an aclivator alom or ion and
gives up its energy by emillimy light. In contrast to Muorescence, how-
ever, in phosphorescence ue ahrays have a lemporary storing of the eccile-
tion energy by trappiny of the chetron in some vacant latlice position ur


===== PDF PAGE 0480 =====

470
ATOMIC PHYSICS
similar electron trap. The dependence of phosphorescence on the struc-
ture is obvious from the role of the trapping centers. The temperature
dependence is also easy to understand. At low temperatures the trapped
electrons have difficulty in getting out of the traps again, because the
thermal energy of the lattice vibrations is so small. Unly a few electrons
are thus released per second, and we have a persistent, but weak, emis-
sion which decays exponentially. On the other hand, at higher temper-
atures the trapped electrons are released at a higher rate from their
traps and thus produce a more intensive, but rapidly decaying, phos-
B
Conduction
band
idden
Absorption
Forbi
transition
Filled
band
Fic. 225.
Energy-band diagram indicuting why pure ideal crystals gonerally do not.
exhibit any luminesn‹
phorescence. The light sum (the total light emitted during the decay)
for the same excitation is the same in both cases, as is to be expected.
The main features of the great, almost confusing, number of experi-
mental results which experimenters have assembled siner the time of
Lenard now can be explained. First we ask why an ideal lattic does
not exhibit luminescence. This can be explained by means of Fig. 225.
If an electron of the occupied enorgy band A absores a photon, it is
raised to that state of the higher unoccupied band B which has the same
ki-quantum number. Now if it does not immediately jump bark under
emission of light. (Muorescence), it will lose energy by interacting with
the lattice, until it reaches the lower edge of the onorgy band B, where
it has a dilterent, quantum number k. This transfer d enorgy dcurs
very rapidly because the period of a lattice vibration with 10 la sec is
very short. compared with the natural life of 10 & ser in the upper state.
The direct reverse transition mentioned above, therefore, is very im-
probable. Now, however, the election cannel jump back from the
lower edge of the upper band into the band A by omitting a photon,
because the corresponding quantum stale l, to which a transition could
occur, is occupied. Luminescence by ideal, pure crystals ther fore
seems impossible.


===== PDF PAGE 0481 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 471
The luminescence of metal-ativated crystals can be explained by
means of the energy band diagram Fig. 226 which is closely related to
that of a crystal with N- and P-type semiconductivity. A is again the
highest occupied energy bund und B the first normally unoccupied
conduction hand of the normal crystal lattice.
In audition, there are
again "impurity levels" (' and D) of substitutional or interstitial foreign
atoms. C! are the activator states which, in general, are occupied by
electrons, because transitions to the completely filled band are im-
possible. The states 1), finally, belong to electron traps, in which elec-
Conduction
B
band
• Electron
Fundamental absorption,
Trapping
' traps
orest
emission
Activator absorpi
Fluorescence
Activator
C
atoms
Filled
band
Fid. 226.
Enorgs-band diagrom of a crystal with activator atoma and electron traps, for
the explanation of crystal phosphorse.
tons can he bound at least comporarily. In the normal case, the D
levels are empty. The particular position of the lovels C and I with
respect to the bands i and B dopends on the conization energy or
dectron allinity of the atoms under consideration. This explains why
certain activator atoms are more favorable than others.
The mechanism of phosphoresconce now soons to be the following:
An clectron is raised from the filled band a to the unfilled band B by
the absorption of sulliciontly shortware light (or impact by &-particles
or electrons). In this state it seems to more freaky in the lottiee.
In
most erystals this absorption lies in the ultraviolet, since the separation
of the chorgy bands is approximately equal to the fire excitation stop
of the atom. This absorption by the fundamental lattice is very strong
because all doctrons in band i can absorb.
The holes resulting from
the conization of cloctrons in band i are filled by a nonradiative transi-
tion from the occupied activator state 6'. The details of this transition
have not yot been splained. The free clectron in B now can diffuse
to the location of an activator atom and thoroby give up energy to the
lattice, until it makes a transition to the state C' under emission of light.
On the other hand, it may, bofore it moods an activator atom, be trapped
in a slate D. We spook of trapping, for the transition D → A is not.


===== PDF PAGE 0482 =====

472
ATOMIC PHYSICS
possible because the gaps in A are filled from C', and the transition
D → C is not possible because the separation of the two places in general
is too great. Thus the electron and its excitation energy are stored in D
until, by transfer of thermal energy or by the absorption of longware radia-
tion, it gets back to state B, diffuses to an activator atom, and mits light by
a transition to C. This seems to be the essential mechanism of phosphores-
cence which thus clearly depends on the number of electron traps (states D),
the number of emilling atoms (states (.), and the temperature. The very
longwave absorption D → B is very weak because of the relatively few
occupied D states; by measuring the corresponding absorption, the
number of occupied I states can be determined. The trapping states D,
which are necessary for phosphorescence, can also be reached by direct
absorption from the fundamental hand A. This absorption is very much
weaker than the fundamental lattice absorption 1 → B, but stronger
than the longwave absorption D → B, which depends on the number
of occupied D states. There is, finally, the possibility of absorption by
the activator atoms themselves (transition (→ B). This absorption
is proportional to the number of activator atoms ((' states).
It is elear that the diffusion of the liberated electrons in band B repre-
sents an electric convection current and therefore, if an clectric field is
applied to the crystal, it can be measured electrically just as in the cor-
responding cases of the l clectrons (page 459) or the photoelectrons in
semiconductors.
No doubt, the theoretical picture described here is much too simple.
It will require considerable development and refinemont. before it can
explain in detail the mass of existing empirical results which is continu-
ously increasing at a surprising rate.
Recently, for instance, phosphors with two kinds of activator atoms
Ce.g., Side with (u and Sm) were investigated in more detail. While
the copper atom as the "dominant actirator" is responsible for the emis-
sion process, the auriliary anator (in this case sunarium) supplied the
trapping states (D) in Fig. 226). Leverenz, furthermore, distinguishes
betweons and i phosphors, cording to whether the activator drupios
in interstitial place or, as a substitutional atom, a normal lattice plier.
Many known differences in the behavior of different phosphors, for
instance with respect to their photoconductivity, can be understood on
the basis of this distinction.
We mention in concluding, that the macrocrystalline structure of
phosphors seems to be responsible for their different, behavior with
respect to excitation by light or particles. High light eliciony from
corpuscular excitation is obtained only with larger, reasonably porfect
crystals in which the free electrons travel a suficiently long moan frec


===== PDF PAGE 0483 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS ON THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE 173
path in the lattice until they find an activator atom. Light absorption
with subsequent emission, on the other hand, occurs very frequently
either by the activator atoms themselves (transition C → B) or in the
close neighborhood of an activator atom, so that a good phosphorescence
yield with light excitation is found in crystal powders in which the
electrons cannot. migrate very far.
7-16. Collision Processes at the Surface of Solids
To conclude our atomistic treatment of solid state physics, we shall
briefly consider a number of interesting collision processes which occur
at the surlace of solids. First, there is the question of the possible
ionization of atoms at the surface of an incandescent metal. Second,
thore are the phenomena connected with an energy transfer to the crys-
tal lattico or crystal clertrons in collisions between electrons, ions, normal
on excited atoms on the one side, and the surface of a solid body on
the other.
In discussing the conization at an incandescent surface we start from
the experimental results according to which alkali atoms in the vapor
phase that impinge on an incundescent tungsten strip leave the strip as
ions, it they are atoms of the heavy alkalies potassium, rubidium, and
ewium. However, dome of the lighter alkalies lithium and sodium
leave the incandescent tungsten surface unionized. On the other hand,
all alkali atoms are ionised at in incandescent platinum sheet. We may
assume that. the atoms which come in contact with the metal surface
are it first inborbed and then, as a result of the high temperature of the
shoot, craporate. Then it is only a question of whether a departing
alon carries its outer doctron with it or leaves it in the metal.
We can understand the whok situation if we imagine that the evapo-
ration may occur in sovered slops (amlogous to the Born cycle, page +29).
Instead of the nontral atom we can imagine that first an ion evaporates.
By adding enorgy coul to the work function d we then release an elec-
tron from the metal and let it recombine with the ion to form in atom,
therby releasing the imization energy ki. Actually the process occurs
in such a manner that the boast possible enorgy is required.
Thus, ir
" > E;
(7-19)
the doc ron romains in the modal and the atom leaves the surface as an
ion. For in odder to liberate an olectron from the metal and let it to
combine with the ion, the enorgy o
K, would have to be expended.
In the normal case, however, who
(7-20)


===== PDF PAGE 0484 =====

474
ATOMIC PHYSICS
the energy Ei - & is gained if an electron is "pulled" out of the metal
and united with the ion. In this case the atoms will not be ionized in
collisions with the incandescent metal. These theoretical conclusions
are in good agreement with the experimental results. The heavy alkali
atoms K, Rb, and Cs have ionization potentials which are smaller than
the work function of tungsten, 4.5 ev. The light alkalies Li and Na, on
the other hand, have larger ionization potentials. However, the ioniza
tion potentials of all alkalies lie below the work function of platinum
with 6.2 ev; thus all alkali atoms are ionized by incandescent platinum.
The reverse process occurs at the cathode of glow and are discharges.
Following the lines of force of the electric field, positive gas ions from
the discharge arrive at the cathode and are neutralized. This implies
that they pull an electron out of the cathode and leave it as an atom.
According to our previous discussion, this ncutralization is energetically
possible only if (7-20) is fulfilled. This, however, is the case, if we dis-
regard discharges in the heaviest alkali vapors and a few electrode
metals with particularly high work functions.
Now we shall discuss the mechanism of the energy transfer to the
metal.
For in our example the energy l, is released in the neutraliza-
tion of the arriving ion and is used partly for the release of i metal
electron (under expenditure of the work function d), whereas the reast,
Ei —Ф, heats the cathode. This mechanism of neutralization may be
regarded in a very pictorial manner. The positive ion attracts electro-
statically a quasi-free metal olectron and recombines with it. The
process is more difficult to understand, if the condition
(7-21)
is fulfilled. In this case the potential enorgy released in the neutralizi-
tion of the ion is larger than the work tunetion of lue electrons. In
these cases, actually too electrons are released. This secondary olectron
emission by ion bombardmond is observed particularly in discharges in
the noble gases helium and neon with their high imization polentials.
However, a metastable helium atom (see page 139) can also give up ils
potential energy (excitation enorgy) in a collision of the second kind
with a metal surface and release one or two secondary dectrons.
"I'he:
mechanism of this process is dilliculo to understand because no coot-
static eflect, is possible now, and the puroly mechanical clieed of the
collision does not explain the emergence of an election (or even two,
because the impact is directed toward the interior of the motal. Basi-
cally the same difficulty is met in the transfer of puroly kindlie onorgy lo
the metal in collisions. Fast electrons of sulliciont kindlic enorgy, in
collisions with metals, can release a large number of secondary clectrons,


===== PDF PAGE 0485 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
475
a technically very important process. Fast positive ions, similarly, can
liberate, though with much smaller efficiency, electrons at the cathode
of glow discharges, and furthermore cause the phenomenon of cathode
sputtering, i.c., remove whole atoms from the metal surface.
It seems very probable that thermal processes and not simply me-
chanical collision eficets are responsible for all these phenomena. We
know, for example, that the mode of a high-current carbon are and
of certain spark discharges con be heuted to violent evaporation by the
discharge clectrons which release on the anode their kinetic energy as
well as the energy corresponding to the work function. The possibility
has been considered that cathode sputtering is que to a similar effect
of positive ions. However, this explanation scemed to be ruled out by
the observation that the hoat conductivity secme to have no influence
on cathode sputtering. To cite one example: metallic silver and the
poorly conducting silver chloride both eshibit equally strong cathode
sputtering. However, all these difliculties are removed if, according to
Seeliger, these phenomenn arr regiuded asi very local overheating or,
to use a familiar expression, as an extreme case of local lattice loosening.
We have to imagine, then, that the temperature of a very small region
of the cathode erecks by far the critical temporture so that we have
a gas-like stade of matter of high consity. Whether there exista an
dotual thermal equilibrium between the original lattiee particles and the
colliding particles sooms mor than doubtfal, however.
In concluding this chapter on atomistic solid slate physics, we again
stress the fact that a satisfactory and rigorons presentation of this field,
cording do the presend slate of our knowledge, is not yet possible.
However, we hope that our discussion of the most important problems
of solid stade physies has, on the one side, shown how fruitful the atom-
istis method of treatmont has proved to be and that it may, on the other
side, have holperd us to roalice how important it is to pay close adlention
in the future to this promising diold of atomic physics.
Literature
General Reference Boolis
Vol. 21 0d the Handbuck dor Plssil, Straktur dor zusammonhängenden Materio,
20 od., springer Verlag, Berlin, 19931.
Meile, F.: The Modern Theory of Solids, Mord-Hill Book C'ompany, Inc., New
York, 1910.
NOTION 1:
Frenkol, d.: Kinotie Thors of Liquids, Colord Gniversity Pross, New York, 1916.
Gingrich, d.D.: The dittaction of ders le liquid dements, der. Modl. I'hys.,
15, 10 (1913).


===== PDF PAGE 0486 =====

476
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Lehmann, O.: Die Lehre von den flüssigen Kristallen, J. F. Lehmann, Wisbaden,
1918.
SEcTION 3:
Finkelnburg, W.: Kontinuierliche Spektren, Springer-Verlug, Berlin, 1938.
SECTION 4:
Bragg, W. H., and W. I. Brugg: The Crystalline State, Ceorge Bell & Sons, London,
1933.
SBOTION 5:
Fermi, E.: Moleküle und Kristalle, J. A. Barth, Leipzig, 1938.
SECTION 6:
Barrett, C. S.: Structure of Metals, McGraw-Fill Book Company, Inc, Now York,
1943.
Bors, W.: An Introduction to the Physica of Metal and Allove, John Wiley & Sona,
Inc., New York, 1948.
Dehlinger, U.: Chemischo Physik der Metalle und Legiorungen, Akademische
Verlagagesolsehalt. m.b.Ml., Keizig, 1939.
Hume-Rother, W.: Structure of Metals and Alloys, Now York Chomical Co.,
New York, 1931.
Moti, N. k., and HI. Jones: The Structure of Metals and Alloys, Oxford University
Presa, New York, 1936.
Schmid, 1, and W. Bow: Kristallplastizität, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1935.
Seitz, 1.: The Physics of Metals, Modiraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., Now York,
1943.
Wilson, A. H.: The Theory of Motan, Cambridge Univorsity Press, London, 1086.
Zener, C.: Plasticity and Anolasticity of Metals, Chicago Univorsity Pross, Chieugo.
1948.
SECTION 7:
Brillouin, lo.: Wave T'ropagation in Periodie Structures, Me iraw Mill Book Company,
Inc., New York, 1946.
SECTIONS & AND D:
Pröblich, H.: Elektronentheorie der Metalle, Springer-Verlag, Borlin, 19:36.
Justi, W.: Leitfähigkeit and Loitungemochanismus Tester Sotte, Vendonhook und
Ruprocht, Giöttingon, 1918
Mott, N. I, and R. W. Gurney: Electronic Processes in tonio Crystals, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1940.
Wilkon, A. Hl.: Semiconductors and Molas, Canbridge Univorsity Press, London,
193..
NaTION 11:
Becker, R., and W. Döring: Perromagnetismus, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 19:30.
Soner, D. Co: Perronagnolisi, Rep. Progr. Thus. 11, l3 (1918).
NATION 12:
Joat, W'.: Diluxion und chemisch Reaktion in fosten Stolen, T. Steinkopf, Loipzig,
1937.


===== PDF PAGE 0487 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS OF THE LIQUID AND SOLID STATE
477
SECTION 13:
von Angerer, B.: Wissenschaftliche Photographie, Akademische Verlagegesellschaft,
Leipzig, 1931.
Mott, N. F., and K. W. Gurney: blectronic Processes in lonic Crystals, Oxford
University Press, Now York, 1940.
Pohl, K. W.: "Optik" sus "Einführung in die Physik", Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1948.
Seitz, F.: Color center in alkali-halide crystals, Reo. Mod. Phys. 18, 384 (1946).
SECTION 14:
Gudden, B.: Lichtelektrische Precheinungen, Springer-Verlog, Berlin, 1928.
Lange, B.: Die Photockemento und ihre Anwendung, J. A. Barth, Leipzig, 19-410.
Mott, N. I, and R. W. Gurney: Electronie Processes in lonic Crystals, Oxford
University Press, Now York, 1910.
Wilson, A. HI.: Semiconductor and Metals, Cumbridge University Press, London,
1939.
SECTION 15:
Kroeger, F. A.: Somo Aspecte of the Luminescence of Solida, lilsevior Publ. (o.,
New York and Amstordam, 1918.
Pringsheim, P.: Fluorescence and Phosphoreseener, Intersiones Publishers, Now
York, 1919.
Pringshrim, P
%, and M. Vogol: Luminesconce of Liquide and Solida, Interscionce
Publishers, Now York, 1916.
Richl, N.: Physikalische and Technisch Anwendungon der Luminesson%, Springer-
Vorlag, Borlin, 1011.
Soile, l'., el al: Solid Luminescent. Matorials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Now York,
1948.


===== PDF PAGE 0488 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0489 =====

APPENDIX
The Most Important Constants and Energ! Relatimes of Atomic Physics
Planck's constant..
h = (63.623 0.001) X 10-27 сг-ясс
Velocity of light...
. .
c = (2.99776 ÷ 0.00004) X 101º cm seo-1
Charge of the electron
c = (4.8024 ≤ 0.0005) × 10-10 CHL
= (1.60109) # 0.00016) × 10-10 coulombs (amp-sec)
Rest mass of the electron.
70 = (9.1066 0.0012) X 10-28 gm
Rest mass of the proton..
Mp = (1.6723 ≤ 0.0001) × 107 gm
Rost mass of the noutron..
MN = (1.67-17 # 0.0002) X 10-24 gm
Atomic wright of the pri-
ton....
. ..
1, = 1.007582 ≤ 0.000004
Atomic weight of the nola-
tron in physical units.. An = 1.008939 # 0.000007
Atomic wright of the cler-
tron..
1, = (5.1862 = 0.0006 X 10-4
Avogadro's number......
No= (6.0235 # 0.0004) X 10)23
Paraly.........
/ = 96522 = 7 coulombs/mole
Boltzmann's constant....
= 11.3808 ÷ 0.0000) Х 10 встд лод 1
Relations betwoon differont enorgy unite used in atomic phyrier:
1 0v = 8,007.500 1 = 1.602 X 10-18 0rg = 2:3.0.1 kceml/mole:
I atomie mass unit. = 081 Mo
Rolation hotwoon excitation potential li (olootron volts) and wavelength & in ang-
stroms of corresponding radiation:
1A) X E (ov) = 12,100
179


===== PDF PAGE 0490 =====




===== PDF PAGE 0491 =====

INDEX
Annihilation of mass, 327
Anomuly, of Cu electron shell, 175
Abbe's theory of imuge formation, 348
of specific heat of hydrogen, 396
Aegg, R., 410
Antineutrino, 283
Abogg's valenee rule, 110
Antisymmetric eigenfunction, 232
Absorption continua, of atoms, 106
Are spoctrum, 79
of molecules, 387
Associated aphorical harmonics, 223
Absorption edge, S-ray, 121
Astatine (element. 85), 308
Absorption spectra, 71
Aston, F. W., 13, 16-50, 06, 321
Acaurality in microphysics, 2.12
Alom, effective nucleur churge of, 125,
Acceleration of cosmic my particles, 323
171
Accelerators for nuclear partickon, cir-
mIss of, 18
cular, 256
radius of, 18
lineur, 256
size: of, 18
multiple, 255
Alom core and valence electrons, 125
Actinides, 176
Alon molecule, 381
Action, significance of, in atomic physics,
Alomic bomb, 301
2.12
Alomie constants, ladle of, 179)
Active nitrogon, 112
Atomie energy (nuclet enorgy), 30-1
Alkali atoms, sportre of, 125,
Alomie-norgy unils, 806
Alkali-halide crystals, coloration of, 158
Alonic model of Rutherford, 2:3
Alloys, ordor and disorder phenomon
Alomie models, 27
0f, 130)
Alonic nuclous, liquid drop model of,
substitutional and interstitial, 135
207
theory of, 1316
ex-particlo emission of, 275
Alonnie number N, 25
stability of, il!
Atomic shell processes, 103
e-sources, 25.1
Atomic spectra, normal torme in, 1.15
Alternating intonsities in land spectrie,
resoniner lines in, 102
305
Atomic aislems, coupled, interacting,
AlvIr*%, 1. W., 242
228
Americium, 130:3
Atomic wright, 11
Amorphous structure of soliss, 11x
scale of, chemical, 11
Ampire molecular curronts, 152
physical, 11
Anderson, 6: 19., 242, 331
Aloma, chemical proportion of, atomistic
Angorer, l. von, 177
resplanation of, 168, 180
Angstrom unit, lit
in elootri and magnetic fiolds, 155
Angular
momentum, quantication of,
"sciation onorgy of, 87
113
magnetic properties of, 152
Anharmonie oscillator, molecular model,
many lootron, complexity of, 135
367
metastable, 111
Ansetropy of liquid crostals, 121
stripperd, 10, 116
1X1


===== PDF PAGE 0492 =====

482
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Aurora lines, 141
Betatron, 261
Autoionization, 186
light radiation of, 262
Avogadro, A., 15
stabilization of electron orbit in,
Avogadro's number, 15
Bethe, H. A., 311, 312, 344
B
Bevatron, 263
Binding energy, of nuclei, 271
Babcock, H. W., 323
per nucleon, theory of, 317
Bacher, R. F., 190, 314
Binding and loosening electrons, 412
Back, E., 161, 183, 190
Birge, R. T., 379
Balmer, J. J., 80
Blackett, P. M. S., 252, 285
Balmer formula, 80
Blau, M., 254, 331
Balmer lines, in absorption, 102
Bloch, F., 269
of heavy hydrogen, 181
Bloch method (nuclear magnetic mo
Balmer series, 80
ments), 269
Band in molecular spectrum, 356
Blocking layer in semiconductor, 465
alternating intensities in, 395
Boas, W., 476
positive, negative, and zero brunch in, Bohr, N., 67, 84, 114, 116, 284, 302
390-393
Bohr magneton, 36, 159
shaded towards red or violet, 393
Bohr orbit of hydrogen atom, radius
Band dingram of electron energies in
of, 1)7
crystal, 438
Bohr postulates, 8t
Band edge in molecular spectrum, 393
explanation of, by de Broglie, 205
Band formula, empirical, 375
Bohr theory, concepts of, 81
Band intensities, 3963
Bohr's frequency condition, 85
Band lines, 356
Bohr-Sommerfeld theory of atom, 130
missing, in electron band, 394
experimental confirmation of, 93
Bund spectrum, 78, 356
Boltzmann, 1a, 11, 79
zero lines in, 358, 375
Boltzmann's constant, 15, 179
Band system, 356
Boltzmnn factor, 167
structure of, 372
Bonke, H., 188
Bardeen, J., 468
BonhoeTer, K. l., 396
Barium oxide cathode, theory of, 461
Bopp, l., 211
Barklusen, I., 450
Born, M., 211, 213, 216, 429
Barkhausen steps, 450
Born cycle, 121)
Burn Ceross section of 10-4 (m3), 298
Bothe, W., 285, 281), 311
Burnett, S. I., 154
Boundary conditions, role of, in wave
Burnelt effect, 154
mechanics, 207
Barrett, C. S., 176
Bowen, 1. N., 116, 1-41
Barrier layer in somiconductor, 487
Brackett, K. N., 101
Bavink, B., 3, 8
Brugg, W. Hl., 73, 3-18, 176
Becker, R., 450, 452, 476
Brugg, W. l4. 176
Beequerel, Hl., 273
Brugg formula for X-ray diffraction,
Benzone ring, chemical binding of, +15
• 126
Brattain, W. II., 168
Braun, F., 31
Breeding of nuclear fuel, 307
Bromsstrahlung, 110
of high-energy dectrons, 126
Graciation, continuous spectrum of, 279
X-rily, 120


===== PDF PAGE 0493 =====

INDEX
483
Bridgman, P. W., 8
Cloud chamber, 250
active time of, 251
continuous working of, 251
Brillouin, L., 246, 476
triggered by Geiger counters, 253
3rode, K. B., 32!
Clusius, K., 61
3roek, vun den, A. J., 21
oincidence counter, 25
Broglie, de, I., 191, 196, 202
ollision broadening, molecular explans
Broglie, de, M., 121
Broglie, de, wavelength, 197
Broglie, de, waves, 202
phase velocity of, 203
Collision processes, of high-energy eler:-
Brownian molecular motion, 11
Brüche, Ii, 16, 615
Bucherer, Н., 35
Collisions, of first kind, 104
of metartable atoms, 105
of sceond kind, 107
Canal riys, 10
Color renters, 458
Canonically conjugated variables, 200
Coloration of alkali-halide crystals, 458
•Carbon atom, valence cloctrons of, 11-1
Combination principle of Ritz, 81
Carbon-nitrogen code, macker onergy
Combination vibrations of molecules,
production by, 312
406
Curio, (i., 70)
Complementary properties of atomic
Creade gonerator, 250
Hystems, 214
Crusade shower, 329)
Comprasibility of solids, 130
Catalytic nucer reactions in sun, 313
Complon, A. HI., 73, 193
Cathode, thermonic, 32
Compton eftoet, 194
Cathore reys, 30
Complon wavelength, of electron, 195
Cathed-my coilloscope, i7
of proton, 342
C'ausality principle, clussical and sti-
Condon, k. UJ., 188, 231, 246, 370
tistical, 211
Conduction Land of metals, 143
(thudwiok, J., 25, 280), 315
Conduction cloctrons in metals, +32
Chain renotion, molour, 300
Conductivity, dectronie, of metals, 413
(Chandras khar, M., &
of semiconductors, 162
(harnetoristic S-my mdiation, 120
ionic, of polar crystals, 457
(Chemical binding, explanation of, 10)
(Conraud, R., -17
localizer and nonlocalized, 115
C'onstruction principle, for electron
Chemical bond, citered of clotron pirs
shells of atoms, 116, 168
on, 110
for nuclear shells, 322
polar and homopolar, 110
C'ontact polential, theory of, 449
Chomien! formula of molerulo, 316
C'ontinuous spectra, 78
Chemical properties of atoms, atomistic
atomic, 103
esplanation of, 168, 180)
mokocular, 376
Chemistry, in rolation
lo molocular Continuous spectrum of B-radiation,
physics, is 16
279
theorotion foundation of, 3.17
C'onversion of enorgy into matter, 327
Chromophorio groups in molecules, 102
Coordination number of crystal lattier,
Classient statistics, 237
132
(lausius, К., 11
('orrespondener principle of Bohr, 167
Closed nucleon sholls, 2997
Corson, D. k., 300


===== PDF PAGE 0494 =====

484
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Cosmic rays, origin of, 323
D
primary particles of, 32:
accelerution of, 323
d electron, 130
primary and secondury processes of,
Il electrons, role in periodic table, 175
322
D) term, 130
Cosmotron, 263
D's (central part of eyelotron), 256
Counters for nuclenr rudiation, 252
Dänzer, HI., 246, 302, 344
Coupled atomic systems, interaction
Dalton, J., 10
Dalton's laws, 11
Coupling, of atomic electrons, 136
Dark conductivity of semiconductor,
of electronic motion and vibration in
462
crystals, 440
Davisson, (!. J., 196, 202
between nucleons, 2112
de Broglie wavelength, 1997
of orbital and spin momenta in der-
de Broglie wavex, 202
tron shells, 146
phase velncity of, 203
Covolume, 348
Debye, P., 74, 196, 417, 119, 425
Critical mass of fissionuble material, 305
Decay, rudioactivo, 273
Critical potentials of atoms, 88
Defect-conduction in crystal lattices, 455
Crystal, as macromolecule, 423
Deformative vibrations of molecules,
Crystal
counters for nuclear radiation,
406
253
Degeneracy, of atomic levels, 166
Crystal defects, 422, 451
of cigonfunctions, 209)
Crystal energy bunds, fully or partly
of energy lovols, 130
occupied, 142
of Formi cloctron gas, 2338
Crystal lattices, atomic, ionic, or moler-
of hydrogon atom enorgy slates, 225
ular, 423
Degenorate cigonvalues, 2:30
coordination number of, 132
Dogonoration Comperature of Formi gis,
Crystal luminescence, -168
238
Crystal phosphors, 168
Dehlinger, U., 133, 152, 176
activation of, 46!
Dempster, A. J., 50
clectron traps for, 171
Detectors for nuclear particles, 249
Crystal systoms and structure analysis,
Deuterium, 15,
125
Deuteron, 15
Crystal vibrations, external and interndl,
Diamagnotiam, explination of, 152
Diatomic molecule, coctron torm din-
(rostalline state of solids and liquids,
gran of, 359
model of, 358
Crystals, electron spretra of, 137
theory, of vibration of, 365
ideal and real, 12'2
ol rotation of, 388
liquid, 119)
Dichroism, 121
luminescence of, 468
Dickel, Ci., 61
C'a, dual valonce, 175
DilTraction esperimont and uncortainly
Curic, I., 281
principle, 199
Curio, M., 273
Diluse series in line spect rum, 125
(lurie, l., 155, 273
Dipole momont. and molecular stre-
Curic's law, 155
turo, 350
Curium (element 96), 303
Dipole radiation, 110
Curric, 355
Dirao, l. A. M., 192, 217, 211, 216, 282,
Cyclotron, 256
327 320, 337, 311
Cissorny, M., 72, 388
Directional quantization, 156


===== PDF PAGE 0495 =====

INDEX
485
Direction-focussing of mass spectro-
Flectrolysis, 11
graph, 50
Electron bremsstrahlung, 110
Dissociation, opticul, 377
Electron collision experiments, 88
thermal, 377
Electron configurations of all atoms, 178
Dissociation continuum, 377
Electron lenses, electric and magnetic, 38
Dissociation energy, determination of,
Electron microscope, 38
Electron orbits of atoms,
circular and
of molecule, 368
elliptical, 130
of polvatomic molecules, 404
hyperbolic, 223
Displacement. la; spectroscopic, 111
Electron-pair annihilation, 327
Döring, W., 150, 152, 176
production of, 327
Dorgolo, II. 13., 1-10
Electron shells, of atoms, 27, 28
Double bond, chemical, explanation of,
completely occupied inner, 118
413
manifoll excitation of, 137
rigidity of, 415
interaction of, with nuclei, 181
Double excitation of electron shell, 136
nonraulation processer in, 186
Doublet system, 148
occupied, 118
Doublet terma of alkali atoms, 145
structure: of, 117, 168, 176
Dualism, wave-particle, 192
Ilectron spin, 36, 142
DuBridge, I. Л., 65
Electron synchrotron, 263
DuMond, J. W., 276, 327
Plectron trunsition, forbidden, 92, 129
Dushman, S., 2-16, 140
Ilectron traps in crystal phosphor, 471
Dynon, V. J., 2-11
Electron volt. (ev), 86
Electron waves, reflection and refrac-
tion of, 235
Eddington, A.N., 8, 341
standing, 205
Idge diagram of band system, 372
Ioctronic conduction in semiconductors,
Effective nuclear charge of atom (oss,
•162
125, 171
Woetronic instruments, 37
Effective quantam number, (1.8), 128
Eleetrons, allinity of, 10
Iggert, J., 161
crangomont of, in crystal, 137
ligononergy, infinito, 3:39
binding, in molecules, 101
ligonfroquencies of vibrating ustoms,
bound, stationary slates of, 106
208
charge of, 32
Digenfunctions, 208
classical radius of, 36
of hydrogon atom, angular distribu-
density distribution of, in crystal, 427
tion of, 223
in molecules, 318
linear combination of. 2:30
ditTraction of, 196
nodal surfaces and quantum numbers
and structure of molecules, 348
of, 21.1
emission of, secondary, 30, 174
norm of, 209, 212
thermionis, 31, 4-16
orthogonalito and normalization of.
free, production of, 28
209
nonstationary states of, 106
overlapping of, 2:3:3
intrinsic magnotic moment of, 36
symmetrio and antisymmotrio, 2:32
magnetic momont. of, 36
Ligenvalue equation, 20s
mass of, 35
Migonvalues of enores, 208
of nogative miss, 328
Minstein, 1., 17, 01, 167, 113, 321
nonbinding, in molecules, 101
Electrie quadrupole moment of nuclous,
production of, 327
181
rolativistic theory of Dirar on, 327


===== PDF PAGE 0496 =====

486
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Electrons, shell of, 27
F
specific charge of, 35
Electrooptical Kerr effect, 350
F band, 458
Electrostatic generator for high voltage,
F' band, 459
255
I center, 458
Electrostatic mass of electron, 339
F' center, 459
Elementary cell of crystal, 425
§ electrons, role of, in periodie table, 176
Elementary particles, multiple produc
F term, 131
tion of, 325
Fajans, K., 275
properties of, 338
Fariday, M., 18
theory of, 335, 339
Faruduy's laws of clectrolysis, 18
Elements, new, 308
Feather, N., 344
origin of, 315
Fermi, W., 180, 239, 280, 281, 300, 336,
Ellis, C. D., 345
392, 416, +15, 176
Elster, J., 31
Fermi statistics, 237
Emission spectro, 74
Ferromagnotism, 152, 119)
Energy, conversion of, into mutter, 327
and lettice structure, 151
Energy levels, optical, 117
theory and conditions of, 450
X-ray, 118
Pickd cloctron emission, 118
Energy-band model of crystal, 438
Fine structure, of atomic spectril lines,
Fnergy-band width in cryslid, 138
180
Energy-level diagram, of atom, 86
of hydrogen atomic spectrum, 151
of nuelri, 276
of X-ray poctra, 122
Energy levels, width of, 185
Fine structure constant, 312
Energy production in sun and fixe
Finkolnburg, W., 190, 373, 371, 116, 476
stars, 313
Fission, Bohr-Wheeker theory of, 302
Inergy states,
stationary, of atomic
multiple, 301
systems, 106, 208
Fission energy, industrial utilization of,
Energy units, atomic, 86
307
Engel, von, A., 95
Mission process and products, 209
Epstein, P. S., 162
Fission products, radioactivity of, 307
Equilibrium condition in Bohr theory, 17
Fissionable material, 301
Equivalence equation of kinstein, 271
critical mass of, 305
Ertel, H., 314
Fleischmann, R., 285
Kucken, A., 3:00
Flügge, N., 216, 300, 3-15
Ivaporography, 72
Fluorescence, 3033
Ixchange degenericy, 230
sensibilized, 101
Exchange energy, 228
Forbidden sporodral lines, 120)
Exchange forces in nucki, 337
Forbiddon transitions, 02, 121)
Exchange integral, 2:31
Pormation of molecules, 3x1
Exchange resonance in quantum me
Portral, diagram, 1.12
chunies, 228
Fourior anlysis of X-ray data, 318, 126
Pxritation energy of alom, 87
Fowlor, A., 112
Excitation function of atomic clectron, 91
Fowlor, W. A., 329)
lixcitation probability, 91
Francium (clomont. 87), 308
Excitation ruliation of atom, 13
Franck, J., 8X 03, 101, 190, 370
Exclusion principle of Pauli, 169
Franck-Condon principle, 370
lixplosion of nucleus, 324
Franck-Hore experiments, sx
primary, of the universe, 315
Frank, l., 3, 9
Hyring, H., 416
Free states of doctron, 106


===== PDF PAGE 0497 =====

INDEX
487
Frenkel, J., 246, 455, 475
Group spectrum of molecule, 373
Frenkel dofoots, 455
Group velocity, 204
Frequency condition in Bohr theory,
Gudden, B., 477
85
Gurney, R. W., 234, 476, 477
Frequency modulation of cyclotron, 260
Cyromagnetic rutio, 269
Fundamental constants of physies, 341
Fundamental series (Bergmann sories),
Fl atom, energy-level diagram of, 100
127
Bohr theory of, 96
Fundumental smallest length la, 331),
energy eigenvaluce of, 224
341-313
nonstationary slates (E > O) of, 223,
Fundumental vibration frequencies of
molecule, 105
principal quantum number of, 224
Furry, W. I., 66
stationary stales (E < O) of, 223
Fussell, I.., 325. 330
wave-nechunical treutment of, 221
I, molecule, cigenfunction of ground
G
state of, 233
He molecule, 385
y-radiation, explanation of, 276
He' ion, 112
Gamow, (1., 231, 278, 811, 812, 311,
Uga molecule, 385
315, 311
Hahn, ()., 267, 299, 345
Gamon theory of e-decay, 278
Half-life of radicactive nuclei, 273
Gaydon, A. Ci., 116
Half-with of spectral line, 185
Gohroke, 1i., 102
Malice crystals, absorption and eloc-
Goigor, Н., 25, 252, 278
tronic motion of, 168
Geigor- Mäller counter, 252
Hall •fect, 162
Geiger-Nuttall rolation, 278
Hank:, W., 01
Geitel, H., 31
Hansen, (1., 151
Gentner, W., 31.1
Marnwell, (i. l., 65
Gerlach, W:, 157
Harrison, (i. R., 190
Germor, L. 11., 196, 202
Mnrtock, P., 306
Gerthson, 61, 25
Mont of formation of molecule, 346
(dingrich, N. S., 175)
Heavy hydrogen, 60
Class, structure of, lls
Heavy nuclei, build-up process of, 314
Classtone, N., 216, 116
instability of, 302
Cörsler, l., 13:3
Heavy water, (60
Götze:, R., 190
Heronberg, W., 3, 1, 191, 192, 198, 201,
Goldsloin, F., 2!
211, 211, 216, 270, 317, 321, 337,
Goodman, C1, 3-15,
310, 311, 315, 116, 151
Cordly, N., 184
Moisonborg uncertainly principle, 198
Goudsmit, 8., 35, 136, 111, 151, 1833,
Heitkor, W., 231, 216, 110 •112
18X, 190
Holium atom, triple system of, 117
Cravitation constant, 312
Holium spoct.rum, 132
Grogory, C', 30i7
Holman, H1., 216, 116
Circinchor, H., 252
Mondus, 11., 119
Grimm, H. Ci., 127
Honri, V., 379
Circol, do, 1., 190)
Hormann, Ci.,!
Grotrian, W., 126, 188
Hermitcan polynominis, 220
Ground states of atoms, 178
11081%, 86., 660), 8X 1083


===== PDF PAGE 0498 =====

488
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Herzberg, G., 80, 161, 162, 188, 226, 355,
Intermolecular forces, 384
404, 412, 416
Internuclear distances of diatomic mol-
Heteropolar chemical bond, 409
ecules, 389
Heusler alloys, ferromugnetic, 149
Interstitial ions in crystals, 455
Hevesy, von, G., 345
Inversion spectrum of ammonin mol-
Hexagonul ring of benzene molecule, 349
Ifs (hypertine structure), 183
Ion source, Kunsman, for positive ions,
Hibben, J. H., 416
40
Hiller, 396
Ionic conductivity of crystals, 457
Hilsch, R., 458, 469
Ionic crystals, 423
Hoag, J. В., 345
Ionic molecule, 381
Flönigschmid, O., 13
Ionic rulii, 20
Hönl, H., 390
Ionization, 29
Hole theory of Diru:, 328
of atoms in electric field, 186
Homonuclear molecules, rotation strue-
by impact, 29
ture of, 304
at solid incandescent surfaces, 473
Honda, K., 453
thermal, 29
Hückel, E., 415
Ionization chamber, 252
Huggina, W. Ls., 349)
Ionization continuum, of aloms, 106
Hughes, A. L., 65
of molecules, 401
Hume-Rothery, W., 132, 776
Ionization energy, of atoms, 30
Hund, T'., 188, 350, 369. 314, 412
of molecules, 3633
Huygens, C., 192
and scries limit, 88
Hydrogen, specific heat of, anomaly of,
Tonization function, 95
396
Tonization potentiel, 30
Hydrogen aton, Bohr theory of, 96
Tonization probability, 05
orbit of, 197
Ion-pair formation, energy, 250
Hydrogen moleculer continuum, 387
Ions, fres, 40
Hydrogen spectrum, line structure of
negative and positivo, 10
151
rulius of, 20)
Hydrogen-like in, 111
Isobar laws of Mattauch, 320
Hyperbolie orbits of hydrogen electron,
losburic nuclei, 320
223
Isolation of spectral lorms, 83
Hyperfine structure of spectrel lines, 180
Isomerism of atomic nuclei, 219)
Isotope eloct, in alomic spectra, 181
in band spectra, 308
Impact ionization, 105
rotational and vibrational, 309
Indetormines in quantum mechanics,
Isotope rule, Aston's, 321
2.12
Isotope separation, 50
Insulator-properly or crystal, l
Isotopes, abundance of, 13, 17, 315
Intonsily of spectra, 78
miss of, 1.1, 16
Intonsity distribution, in band spectri,
rolative abundance of, in universo, 315
3:97
stability of difteron, 321
in laund system, $72
unstable, d
Intensily rule for multiplots, 167
Interalomic forces, 381
Intercombination bands, 362
i coupling in atomic spectrum, 1-17
Intercombinadion lines, 132
Jeans, J., 9)
Intercombinations in atomic spectra, 140
Jentschko, W., 279
Intermediate-nucloud hypothesis, 28-1
Jevons, W'., 317


===== PDF PAGE 0499 =====

INDEX
489
Joffó, A. F., 65
Joffé's photon experiment, 65
Joliot, F., 281
Jones, H., 176
Jones, R. C., 66
Jordan, P., 3, 8, 9, 190, 1112, 211, 245, Laplace operator, 206
246, 313, 314, 417
Jost, W., 470
Justi, E., 476
K
K effect, 282
K series in X-ray spectri, 119
K shell of atom, 168
Kamen, M. D., 315
Lattice one, yeritie potential fold of,
Kant, I., 215
Kast, W., 420
loosening-up of, 456
Kaufmann, W., 35
Lattice vacancies, 455
Kavi, S., 103
Lattice vibrations, 435
Kavaer, II., 78, 80, 81, 125, 190
unhurmonicity in, 431
Kokuli, Л., 115
fundamental, 136
Kellogg, J. B. 1T., 190
optical and acoustical, 436
Kemble, E. C., 2.16
Jau, V., 93
Kerr effeet, coetro-optical, 350
Lauc, von, M., 73, 193, 196, 425
Kerst, I). W., 202
Tauc pattern, 426
Kimball, 6. 6., 116
Lauritsen, C. Ci., 327
Kinctic enorgy, materialization of, 321
Tauritson, 'T., 205, 206
Klein, ()., 10.1
Lawrenes, 1. 0)., 256
Klein-Rossoland collisions, 101
Lors, D. S., 285
Klemperor, O)., 65
Lohmann, 0)., 119, 121, 176
Knock-on protons, 210
Lenud, P., 22, 20), 169, 170
Кпід, 11., 151
Lenard window for cathode raya, 30
Kohlrausch, K. W.K., 116
Leprince-Kinguel, I., 3:32
Konon, HI., 190
Lovoron%, I1. W., 172
Kopformann, HI., 183, 190, 3-15
Lewis, Ci. N., 110, 117
Kortüm, (1., 121
Light. motor, 167
Kossol, N., 116, 10S, 120, 1222, 168, 109,
Linear accelerator, 256
110, 116
Lineur combination of cigenfunctions,
Kramors, П. Л., 165, 216
2:30
Krobs, 1., 216
Lino intonsition, 161
Krett, Il., 100, 127
Line multiplets, 135
Kröger, F. Л., 177
Line spotra, 78
Krönig, A. k., 11
difuse sories in, 125
Kronig, K. de 1, 12:3, 116
series in, 80, 81, 100, 101, 112-115,
Kuln, I., I8$
125 136
Kunsman, C. II., 10
Line broadening, as molecular phenom-
Kanaman souree of positive ions, 10
Cn0n, 387
sportral, 1x5
Liquid-drop model of atomic nucleus, 267
I series in S-ray spectrum, 119
theory of, 316
L shell, lis
Liquid slate physies, 118


===== PDF PAGE 0500 =====

490
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Liquids, atomic heat of, 420
Mass spectra, 50
dichroism of, 421
Mass spectrograph, 48
doublo refraction of, 421
molecular chains und clusters in, 420
Massey, H. S. W., 190
livingood, J. J., 65
Matcrial waves, 196
Livingston, M. S., 344
Matossi, F., 416
Indon, F., 234, 396, 410, 411
Matrix elements, 216
LooMbourow, J. R., 190
Matrix mechunics, 211
lord, k. C., 190
Muttauch, J., 46, 50-52, 66, 320, 315
losschanidt, J., 15
Muxwell, J. C., 11, 260
Luminescence of crystals, 468
Maxwell-Boltzmann statistica, 237
Lyman, T., 101, 108, 115
Maxwell energy distribution, 237
Lyman serios of hydrogen atom, 101
Mayer, L, 1i
Mean free path, 19
M
Mecke, R., 355, 308, 373, 374, 395, 399,
404, 414, 416
NT shell of atom, 168
Meggers, F. W., 149
Mclennan, J. C., 141
Meissner, K. W., 140
Mr Millan, E. M., 203
Mendelejeff, D. I., 13
Madelung, 1%., 128
Mendelstun, k., 351
Magic-number nuclei, 321
Meson decy, and half-life, 332
Magnetic anomaly of spin, 160
Mosons, 331, 338
Magnetic domains in crystals, 450
processes cused by, 33-4
Magnetic: olectron apectognuph, 277
Mesothorium, 275
Magnetic: momont, of dection, intrinsic,
Mesotron (meson), 331
36
Metal, band structure of, 1.13
of nuclei, 209)
electron gar in, 132
of spin, 113
enorgy bande of, overlapping, 113
Magnetic properties of atoms, 152
Metals, modifications of, 131
Magnetic: quantum number, 159
properties and binding forces of, 131
Magnetiam, an atomic property, 152
Metastable atoms, 111
orbital and spin, 155
collisions of, 105
rInanent, •1583
Metastable states, 139)
Magnolization, spontaneous, of dormains,
mean life of, 111
•150
Microwave spectroscopy, 72
Mugnole mechanical parallelism, 1533
of molecules, 352
Mugnelon, Bohr, of the clectron, 36
Miller indices, 125
Mier-Leibnil%, 11., 131•1
Millikan, R. A., 32, 66, 116, 3-15
Many electron atoms, 132
Millikan oil-drop method, 3i
momplexity of, 135
Millman, S., 66, 190
March, A., 1, 216, 3:30, 315
Mitcholl, A. (:. (i., 1990
Murgenan, 11., 3, 9
Model of diatomic: moleculo, 358
Murk, 11., 106
signilicanes of setomic, 1
Mass, absolute, of ators, 18
Models, atomic, 27
annihilation of, 1327
Moderator for noutrons, 306
of electron, 35)
Modern physics, dolinition of, 1
erunts materialized energy, 324
Molecular band, positivo branch of, 3:0
Must defect of nuclei, 271
shading of, 393
Miss equivalent. of cnergy, 271
Molecular binding, influenee of coloctron
Mass number of nuclei, 206
excitation on, 363


===== PDF PAGE 0501 =====

INDEX
491
Molecular continuous spectri, 376
Neumann, von, J., 246
Molecular crystals, 423
leutretto, 33
Molecular physics, 316
eutrino, 280. 33
Molecular spectra, excitation of, 353
emission of, by fixed stars, 314
structure of, 354
rest mass of, 280
Molecular vibration, theory of, 365
Neutron, 289
detection of, 291
excess of, in fission process, 299
Neutron core of giant fixed stars, 313
liameter of, 3-48
Neutron decay, pontancous, 289
lectron enorry of, 350
Neutron gas in primary state of uni-
verse, 315
eat of formation of, 3-11
Neutron source, 25t, 210
nteraction of vibration sund rotatio
nuclenr pile us, 307
of, 390
Neutrons, production of, 289
picture of, 319)
in fixed stars, 313
rotation energy of, 356
thermal, 291
structural formula for, 316
Now eloments, 308
vibration energy of, 356
Nodal surfaces of cigenfunctions, 214
Molecules, dipole momont of, 350
Noddack, W., 11, -161
formation of, 381
Noddlack-Tacke, I., 11
optical aniso.ropy of, 350
Nonraliative processes in clectron shells,
polyatomic, 100-108
186
Moore, 6! 1., 190
Nonslationary states of free cloctrons,
Morse, P. M., 216, 367
106
Moscley, 11. (i. J., 25, 120
Normal Zoemann eTert, 150)
Moseley's law, 26
Nucler bomb, 30.1
Mott, N. F., 100, 216, 17, 177
Nuclear chain roution, 300
Mrozowski, N., 365, 385
Nucleur chemistry, 219, 213
Mullion, R. N., 100, 112
Nuclear energy, liberation of, 301
Multiple production of clomontary par-
Nuclear energy levols, 295
tieles, 325
theoretical analysis of, 321
Multiplot amlysis, 1-19
width of, 205
Multiplets, intensily rule for, 1067
Nuclear energy slates, stability of, 203
theory of, 112
Nuclear exchange fores, proof for, 337
Multiplication shower, 320
Nucker explosion, 286
Multiplicily, of many-cloctron alons,
Nucler fission, 209
1.17
Nucker Coreos, potontial of, 316
of terms, 13.1
theory of, 335
Multiplicily rule, 131, 118, 1362
Nuclear isomerism, 269
Myers, L. M., 606
Nuclear magnoton, 182, 208
Nuclear photoclock, 288
N
Nuclear physios, applications of, 308
experimental methods of, 219
Nebulium lines, 1-11
Nuclear pile (nucleur reactor), 305
Necdorever, S. 11., 331
as neutron source, 307
Negative branch of molecular band, 3000
Nuclear processes, cnorgy balance of, 212
Neptunium (olomont. 03), 303
Nuclear projectiles, 251
Neptunium series, radicutive, 271, 276
Nuclear quadrapolo moment, 353


===== PDF PAGE 0502 =====

492
ATUMIC PHYSICS
Nuclear radiation, counters for, 252
Nucleus, shell structure of, 321
measurement of, 249
step wise explosion of, 327
protection against, 307
Nuttall, J. M., 278
Nuclear reactions, 284-314
catalytic, in stars, 313
endothermal and exothermal, 293
temperature coefficient of, 312
Occhialini, G. P. S., 332, 345
thermal, in stars, 311
Occupation number of atomic levels, 166
Nuclear reactor (See Nuclear pile)
Occupied electron shells, 118
Nuclear spin, 268
Oetet theory of chemical valence, +10
from hyperfine structure, 184
Oil-drop experiment of Millikan, 33
influence of, on atomic spectra, 182
Oppenheimer, J. R., 337
und rotation structure of molecules,
Optical enorgy lovels, 117
394
Orbital magnetism, 155
Orbital momentum, of atomic electron,
Nuclear spin quantum number I, 182
Nuclear transformations, artificial, 283
cross section of, 297
of nucleons, 321
mechanism of, 283
Orbital quantum number I, 130
Orbital quantum number L, 137
selection rules for, 292
Orbital valened, 412
yield from, 297
Orthoromlity of cigenfunctions, 209)
Nuclei, binding energy of, 271, 317
build-up process for heuvy, 314
Ortho-helium, 132
(Detho-hydrogen, 306
density of, 267
energy level diagrams for, 292
Oscillator, wave-mochanical trentment,
general properties of, 205
instability of heaviest, 302
Oxide enthode, theory of, 161
P
magic-number arrangements of, 321
magnetic moment. of, 218, 269)
nass defect and binding energy of,
P' brunch (nogative branch of molecul
271
baund), 300
muss number of, 266
2) electron, 130
positive charge of, 266
electrons, in periodic table, 173
rulii of, 266
P torm, 130
radioactivo, hulf-life of, 273
f' series of Cl atom, 136
stability of, for dilferent constitution,
Pair production, 282
Pallelium, explamation of chemical inerl-
surface of, 319
ness of, 175
systematics and theory of structure
P'almor, W. Ci., 117
of, 316
Panoth, F. A., 315
Nucleon, 270
Pam-hydrogon, 306
Nucleon shells, closed, 2:7, 322
Paramagnotism, 152
Nucleons, coupling between, 212
saturation state of, 155
Nuelcus, explosion of, 324
Phelium, 132
houting of, 283
Particle acceleralors, 255
Pischen, F., 101, 112, 113, 1.11, 151, 161,
liquid-rop model, 267
190
potential trough model of, 270
Pinchen-Back effoet, 150, 161
quadrupole moment of, 267
of hyperfine-structure lines, 183
Pauli, W., 109, 192


===== PDF PAGE 0503 =====

INDEX
493
Pauli principle, 169, 233
Pollard, B. C., 294, 295
Pauling, Iv., 188, 246, 417, 424, 433, 434
Polyatomic molecules,
combination vi-
Pearse, R. W. B., 416
brations of, 406
Pendelbahnen, 191
excitation and ionization of, 400
Penning, F. M., 190
normal vibrations of, 405
Penney, W. Ci., 117
rotation and moments of inertia of, 403
Periodie table of clemonts, 16
structure and spectra of, 351, 404
break-off of, 303
vibration and dissociation of, 404
explanation of, 168
Positron, 281, 327, 338
gaps in, 301)
Potential curve, 306
Perlman, U. 1., 315
of stable and unstable molecules, 363,
Perrin, F., 15
367
Pfund, II. A., 101
Potential trough model of nucleus, 270
Phase velocity of de Broglie waves, 203 Potential wall, penetration by tunnel
Philipp, K., 277
effecti, 23+
Phoaphor, light, sum of, 170
l'otential-curve diagrom of molerule, 39t
Photo emf of semiconductor, 106
Powell, C. F., 332, 315
Photochemistry and molecular spertra,
Precissociation, 379
381
• polyalomic molecules, 107
Photoconductivity, of colored crystals,
Proionzation, 186
459
Present, R. 1). 266
of somiconductors, 166
Price, W. 6, 363, 101
Photodissociation, 377
Primary component of coumic rays, 323
Photoeffect, intornal, 166
Principal quantum number n, 130, 224
Photococtric coll, 81
Principal serios, 125,
Photoclectric oTert, 31, 193
Pringshoim, l., 116, 177
Photoclement, semiconductor, 107
Promethium (element, 61), 308
blocking-lavor, 167
Proton, negative, 3:39
Photofission, 301
Proton synchrotron, 263
Photographic image, latend, 161
Proud, W., 11,12
Photographic method for
Prout's hypothesis, 1.1
scarch, 2583
Pulsating sars, mechanism of, sl1
Photography, basio atomic process of,
Purell, D. M., 269)
460
Purcoll mothed for measuring nuclear
P'hotoionization, 106
magnetic moments, 269
Photon, 02, 11183, 8.38
mass and momentum of, 2
Photoresistive colls, -16
¿brunch Core branch of molecular
Pickering, W. H., 112
12640), 8091
Pile, nuclear, 1305
Quacuple momont of muckola, 207
Planck, M., 1, i3, 11, 12, li7, 202
Quadrupole radiation, 1.10
Planch's constant 1, 1i2
Quantization, of angular momentum, 113
Plancle lan of blackbody radiation, 17
dircotionn, 156
Plutonium Colomont 9.11, 1083
Quantu condition of Bohr Choory, or
Plutonium bomb, 1305
Quantum electrodynamics, 102, 217, 3336
Pobl, R. N., 158 160, 100, 177
Quantum jumps, sy
Polanyi, M., 117
Quantum mechanics, 191
Polarization, of molecules, 300
concoptual dificulties of, 2.12
of atom core, 128
limitations of, 210
of light in wave mochanies, 216
philosophical signiticanes of, 210


===== PDF PAGE 0504 =====

494
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Quantum number, k, of electron in crys-
Rayleigh scattering, 17
tal, 138
Recknagel, A., 46, 65
M, magnetic, 159
Recombination, of atoms to form mol-
orbital, l, 130, 155
ccules, in triple collisions, 381
of entire atom, L, 157
of electrons and ions in triple collisiona
orientation, i, 156
105
principal, n, 130, 155, 221
rudiative, of atoms to form moleculex,
effective, nnis, 128
spin, s, 113, 155
of cleetrons and ions, 107
of total engular most, of atom, Permition rulin, 13, 108
Rectifier tube, 37
of electron, j, 141
Reichenbach, II., 216
of molecule, J, 356
Reichenheim, ()., 93
Quantum numbers, of moleculur states,
Relativistic miss of electron, 35
Relativity theory, role of action in, 242
wave-mochanical interpretation of, 214
and wave mochanion, 192
Quantum statistics, 237, 239
Resonance of two atomic systems, 221)
Quartet system, 149
Resonance lines in atomic spectri, 102
Quintet syston, 149
Rest mass, of cectron, 35
elementary particlos, 33.
Restatrahlon, 136
Retardation continuum, 110
R brunch (positive branch of molecular
Rico, F. O)., 216, 116
band), 3410
Rice, 0). K., 117
Rubi, I. I., 158, 2068
Richarason, (. W., 32, 369, 4.16
Rabi mothod of determining nucler
Richardson equation, 116
magnetic moments, 268
Richudson-Pinstrin-de Hias efect, 151
Ride track (proton synchrotron), 215
Richl, N., 177
Raciation, wave-mechanicel theory of,
Riezler, W., 266, 283, 315
215
Ritz, W., 81
Relative recombination, of electrons
Rile combination principle, x1
and ions, 107
Rojunsky, V., 216
of molecules, 382
Rosenfoold, 1a, 315
Baliouctive displeement. luv, 275
Rossoland, N., x, 10.1
Radioactive isotopes, application of, 30s
Rotation, theory of molenlar, 21x, 3sy
Raulionetive tracom, 300
Rotation constant, 388
Kaliontivity, artificial, 281
Rotation quantum number, half-int-
matural, 273
grid, 219
Riuliophosphorus, 310
Rotation spect rum, 351
Radiosodium, 310
infrared, 348
Radio tube, 37
Rotation structure, of diatomic mole-
Raulius, of atom, 18
What spect rum, 348
of Bohr orbit of hydrogon atom, 17
of cool on bands, 300
of ioris, 20)
Rotation torm diagram of diatomie mol-
of muckos, 260
cule, 3388
Kanan, 6. V., 351
Rotation-vibration spootrum, 351, 389
Kauman spectroopy, 351
Rotator, wave-mechanient treatment,
Rare earth atoms, 176
218
Risotti, F., 315, 356
Rowlins, F. 1. Ci., 116
Ruurk, A. 1., 65


===== PDF PAGE 0505 =====

INDEX
495
Rubens, H., 436
Secondary quantum number k, 130
Runge, C., 80, 84, 125, 160
Second-urder forces, 386
Runge's law, 160
Sceliger, R., 8, 92, 475
Russell, H. N., 146
Secly, S., 66
Russell-Saunders coupling of le und is,
Seitz, F., 424, 175, 176, 177
146
Selection rule, for electron band spectra,
Rusting of iron, 456
Rutherford, Fo, 23, 81, 281, 249), 3-15
for optical trunsitions in crystal, t1l
Rutherford scattering formula, 25
for orbital ‹quantum number 6, 130
Rydberg, J. R., 80, 81
for orbital quantum number la, 133)
Rydberg constant, of holium atom, 113
for orientation quuntum number 11,
of hydrogen atom, s
159
physical significance of, 101
for quantum number f, 183
Kydberg formulas of alkal series, 125
for rotation quantum number A or J,
Rydberg series, 81
388
of band systons, 303
for simultaneous olectron and vite
tion, transitions, 370
S
for total momentumjof electron, 1t5
for total momentum quantum num-
8 electron, 130
ber J, 147
S term, 1:30
Selection rules, for electron transitions
Scha, M. N., 29)
in molecules, 362
Suha's equation, 21)
for melet transformations, 202
Satellites in X-ray spectra, 123
for oscillator, 369
Saunders, K. A., 1166
wave-mechanical theory of, 215
Heattering experimonts of lonrd and
Solonium photoclemont, 167
Rutherford, 22, 2:3
Molf-absorption of spectral line, 75
Schäfer, Ci, 188, 221, 217, 116
Melf-reversel of speckral linow, 75
Scherrer, P., 71, 1906, 125
Nomiconductor, 161
Schift, l., 217
barrior lavor in, 165
Schmid, K., 176
donor and receptor atoma in, 168
Nchmidt-(d, 11. D)., 70
intrinsis, 1633
Schoppor, 1., 251, 257, 321
N-lype and P-lyp, 1083
Schottks, N., 116, 155
retilving proporty of, 165
Schottky defects in crystals, 155
Nomiconductor photockoment, HiT
Schrödinger, 16, 1, 191, 200, 208, 212
Monsibilizee Muor 800100, 101
211, 217
Sopration talke of Clusiun, 61
Schrödinger equation, 207
Noquoner hand Sportrum, 2733
separation of, 222
Series, Bergmann, diltuse, principal, and
time-opondent, 210
sharp, 125
Schrödinger interpretation of wave me
in lino sportra, 80), 81, 10K), 101, 112-
chanies, 212
116, 126 136
Schülor, 11., 181, 207, 102, -103
Nories formula, 80
Schultize, 176, 177
Sorios limit, of atomic linos, 79)
Schumacher, 11. J., 108
and ionization "norgy, 88
Schwitzschild, I., 162
Sorion limid. continuum, 106
Schwingor, J., 211, 337
Mostet sestem in atomic spectrum, 1-19
Scintilloscope, 2533
Sholl of clodrons, 27
Henborg, Ci. T., 300, 315
Shell structure and imization polentials
Secondary electron omission, 171
of atoms, 168


===== PDF PAGE 0506 =====

496
ATOMIC PHYSICS
Shielding constant of atomic core, 171
Stability, of a-particle, 319
Shielding increment, 173
of isobaric nuclei, 320
Shortley, G. H., 188
of nuclear chergy states, 293
Shower of electrons and positrons, 329
Stability surface of nuclei, 319
Sidgwick, N. V., 417
Stabilization of electron orbit in beti
Siegluhn, M., 26, 70, 119, 190
tron, 261
Singlet system in atomic spectra, 148
Stark, J., 156
Singlet term system of helium atom, 147
Stark effect, 156
Skinner, W. B. K., 443, 141
interatomic, 164, 187
Slater, J. C., 265, 451
linear, of 11 atom, 162
Smallest fundumental length, 211
line broadening, 164, 187
Smallest time, 241
and molecular structure, 350
Smokal, A., 351, 422, 457
quudratic, 163
Smith, HI. I)., 345
Starr, M. A., 321)
Sueddon, I. N., 246
Stationary energy states in wave mo-
Soddy, F'., 275
chunies, 208
Sular chorgy, origin of, 311
Stationary states of bound doctron, 100
Solic-state phynicK, +18
Statistical causality, 215
Summerfeld, 1., 67, 116, 124, 130, 151,
Statistical weight of atomic state, 166
188, 217, 3-12
Steenbock, M., 95, 260, 261
Sommertold fine-structure constant, 312
Stefan-Boltzmann law, 17
Spaco quantization, 156
Stereochomistry, angular valences of, 113
Spark spectro, 79
Stern, O., 157, 197
Specific heat of hydrogen, anomaly of,
Stern-Corlach experiment, 156
396
Sieger, Ci., 108
Spectro, absorption and emission of, 71
Stonor, E. C4, 190, 176
classification of, 71
Stranathan, J. D)., 65
recording of, 67
Strandhorg, M. N
l'., 72
of solida, 111
Stressman, k., 207, 2099)
spark, 79)
Stripped atoms, 10, 116
X-ray, 117
Structure-sonsitive and structure inson-
Spectral intonsition in wave mechanics,
sitive proportion of solids, 122
216
Structure of liquids, 11X
Spoetral line intensily, 78, 161
of solids, amorphous and crystallino,
Spoctrel lines, collision broadoning of,
•118
186, 387
Stuart, 1. 1., 113, 116, 120
half-width of, 185
Supernovie, 311
naturl width of, 185
Superstructures in alloys, 1:35
self-roveral of, 75
Supraconductivity, 115, 151
width of, 181, 201
Suthorland, Ci. 13., 116
Spectral series, overlapping of continuum
Swann, W. F. Ci., 3.15
into, 187
Sommotric cigonfunction, 2:32
Speetroscopic instruments, 07
Synchrot ron, 2083
Mpoetroscopie-displacement. lass, 116
exceptions to, 175
Spin of coetron, 3t
Spin magnotism, 155
Taylor, 1. M., 116
Spin quantam number s, 1-13
Toohnicium (olomont 13), 308
Spin valenco, 112
Television tube, 3x
Sponor, 11., 379, 4116
Toller, k., 216, 116


===== PDF PAGE 0507 =====

INDEX
497
Temperature, contral, in normal stars,
315
Temperature determination, from band
Valence crystals, 423
spectra, 308
hardness of, 431
from line broadening, 188
Valence theory, 411
spectroscopic:, 167
role of p electrons in, 413
Term analysis, empirical, 83
Valence vibrations, 406
Term disgrum, of atom, 82
Van do Ciral, J. 11., 255
of nucleus, 2112
Van de Ciruf generator, cectrostatic, 255
Term multiplet, 135
van der Wine crystals, 423
Term systoms, of difterent multiplicity,
vith der Wiels equation, 19
149
van der Wins forcer, 384
non-intercombining, 151
van der Waals molecule, 383
Term values and excitation onorgy, 87
Van Vlock, J. M., 190
Terms, in atomic spectro, normal and Vectorial cudition of angular momenta
inverter, 1.15
of atoms, 137-139, 116-150, 16i1-164
isolation of, 83
Voksler, V., 263
Thermal espansion of solids, 131
Velocity-focussing of mis spectrograph,
Thermal neutrons, 2091
•18
Thermionic doctron omission, theory of,
Vibration bands, infrared, 369
•1.16
Vibration, of diatomic moloules, 365
Thompson, R. W., 333
modes of, 3092
Thomson, (i. P., 106, 202
Vibration Frequoncies, infrard-alive,
Thomson, J.J., 13, 16
370
Thorinded tungston cathode, 117
Vibration quantum number, half-inte
Thorium series, radioactive, 27.1, 276
gral, 220, 866
Thornton, K. I., 300
Vibration term analysis, 371
Trucers, radioactive, 309
Vibrations, localized and nonlocalized,
Transiston, 16s
•1007
Transition probability, 166
norml, of polyatomie molecules, 105
wave-mechanical, 216
Raman-activo, 352
Transuranium clomonts, 3033
rotatory, 107
Triplet system of helium atom, 117
valenor and dotormative, 106
Tunnel alTed, 231
logol, M., 177
and uncertaints principle, 2336
Volume isolope offoot, 181
Two-electron sostoms, 1331
W
11
Uhlenbook, 6i. E., 36, 136, 112, 111, 151
Wardon, 13. la, van dor, 217
Uncertainty principle, 1x
Wagnor, 1, 121, 122
Units, natural sostom of physical, 313
Walolor, W., titi
Universe, ago of, 315
Walter, d., 116
birth of, 315
Wambachor, 11., 251, 1831
Unsüld, 1., $
Nate, quasi-crystallino structure.of, 120
Uranium bomb, 1305
Wisco character of material particles, 202
Uranium-actinium series,
radioactive,
Wavelongth measuromonts, 77
271, 276
Wave-mechamical concopts, physical rig-
Uranium-radium sorics, radioactise, 271,
nificance of, 212
276
Have mechanical theory of radiation,
Urey, 11. 6, 15, 181
215


===== PDF PAGE 0508 =====

ATOMIC PHYSICS
498
Wave-mechanical treatment of atomic
systems, 217
X-ray absorption edge, 121
Wave mechanics, 191
X-ray bremsstrahlung, 120
basic equations of, 206
X-ray diffraction und structure of mol-
Born's statistical interpretation of, 213
Schrödinger's interpretation of, 212
ecules, 348
stationary energy states in, 208
X-ray line cmission, 118
X-ray radiation, charucteristic, 120
Wave number Y (cm-y), 78
X-ray retardation continuum, 111
Wave packet, 204
X-ray spectra, 117
Wave-particle dualism, 192
and chemical binding, 123
of matter, 202
X-ray spectroscopy, 73
Wefelmeyer, W., 267
X-ray sublevels, 123
Weizel, W., 171, 385, 393, 416
X-unit, XU (10-11 cm), 67, 119
Weizsäcker, von, C. F., 3, 9, 244, 247,
302, 311-317, 345
Y
Wentzel, G., 247
Weyl, H., 247
Yuknw:, Fl., 281, 331, 336, 337
Wheeler, J. A., 302
Yukuwa particle, 331
White, H. E., 102, 188, 227
Yukuwa theory, 281, 337
Widerroc, R., 260
Wielund, K., 408
Wien, W., 61, 64, 79
Wierl, R., 196
Zeemann, P., 156, 183
Wigner, V., 277
Zemann effect, normal, 158
Wilson, C. T. R., 23, 250, 251
anomalous, 150
Wilson, I. 13., 246
of hyperfine-structure lines, 183
Wilson, II. Л., 476, 477
Zemansky, M. W., 100
Woeldike, A., 402, 103
Zenor, C., 176
Wolf, K. I., 416
Vero branch of mokoculer band, 301
Work function, elToclive, 415
Loro lines of band spoetrum, 358, 375
theory of, 445
Zero-point energy of oscillator, 220)
Wu, Ta You, 416


===== PDF PAGE 0509 =====


